METHODOLOGY
Open Access
Toward systematic integration between Self-
Determination Theory and Motivational
Interviewing as examples of top-down and
bottom-up intervention development: Autonomy
or volition as a fundamental theoretical principle
Maarten Vansteenkiste1*, Geoffrey C Williams2 and Ken Resnicow3
Abstract
Clinical interventions can be developed through two distinct pathways. In the first, which we call top-down, a well-
articulated theory drives the development of the intervention, whereas in the case of a bottom-up approach,
clinical experience, more so than a dedicated theoretical perspective, drives the intervention. Using this dialectic,
this paper discusses Self-Determination Theory (SDT) [1,2] and Motivational Interviewing (MI) [3] as prototypical
examples of a top-down and bottom-up approaches, respectively. We sketch the different starting points, foci and
developmental processes of SDT and MI, but equally note the complementary character and the potential for
systematic integration between both approaches. Nevertheless, for a deeper integration to take place, we contend
that MI researchers might want to embrace autonomy as a fundamental basic process underlying therapeutic
change and we discuss the advantages of doing so.
An important goal for public health and behavioral
medicine researchers and practitioners is to develop
effective behavior change interventions [4]. A key com-
ponent of inducing long term behavior change is build-
ing sustained motivation, such that people not only
engage in the health behaviors during the initial inter-
vention period but afterwards as well.
Researchers and practitioners may follow quite differ-
ent trajectories in developing effective motivational inter-
ventions [5]. In the top-down approach, theoretically
oriented researchers generate a theory for understanding
behavior, emotion and/or cognition, and then construct
an intervention rooted in their theoretical perspective. In
this approach, theory drives intervention. Alternatively,
in a bottom-up approach, clinical intuition and clinical
experience drive the intervention more than any particu-
lar theoretical framework, although developers of a prac-
tice driven intervention may turn to existing theories to
understand how and why their intuitive interventions
work.
Self-Determination Theory (SDT) [1,2] and the inter-
ventions it has spawned, might be considered as a pro-
totypical example of the top-down approach, as it
represents a broad-band theory on personality and
human functioning in social context, whereas Motiva-
tional Interviewing [3,6] could be considered an example
of the bottom-up approach, as it primarily grew out of
clinical practice and necessity rather than out of any
particular theory. Indeed, as noted by Miller and Roll-
nick [7], “MI was not a product of rationale deduction
from [such] theories. Rather it represented a clinical
method, and later a growing body of empirical findings,
in need of theoretical explanation” (p. 134).
Below we compare and contrast these two approaches;
although we focus on SDT and MI as examples of the two
developmental trajectories, we propose some general
guidelines that might inform both research and clinical
practice beyond these two examples. Several scholars have
argued that SDT can be used as a de facto framework for
* Correspondence: Maarten.Vansteenkiste@ugent.be
1Department of Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
© 2012 Vansteenkiste et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

understanding why MI works [8,9]. Nevertheless, we
believe that the potential for systematic integration of
these two approaches has not been fully exploited. By
describing the different starting points and different devel-
opmental histories of SDT and MI as prototypical exam-
ples of top-down and bottom-up research, we try to
provide the basis for how the two can be more clearly
understood with respect to each other. We hope this will
promote greater integration and differentiation based on
areas of overlap and uniqueness, and further the science of
motivation, and the effectiveness of clinical interventions.
In particular, we argue that MI adherents might benefit
from more fully embracing the theoretical principle of
autonomy, as emphasized in SDT.
SDT’s Top-Down Approach
Lewin’s [10] statement that “there is nothing more prac-
tical than a good theory” might be used to characterize
the top-down approach. It is assumed that the develop-
ment of an internally coherent theory is important, not
just for its theoretical elegance, but also because it
allows for hypothesis driven research to test mechan-
isms underlying behavior change. Once these pathways
and processes are identified, interventions can be devel-
oped. A key advantage in the top-down approach is that
it lends itself to understanding how and why an inter-
vention works, not only if.
The starting point of top-down development often
involves a clear articulation of a meta-theoretical foun-
dation, that is, a view on human kind that serves as a
philosophical underpinning of one’s theorizing. To illus-
trate, within SDT [11], an organismic viewpoint is
embraced. It is assumed that individuals have a natural
inclination to be active and to move their lives in
desired and specific directions rather than being passive
and completely subjected to environmental forces that
push them around (e.g., through the use of punishments
and rewards). Through this activity, people would move
towards increased integration, growth and wellness
given sufficient supportive circumstances. As growth-
oriented organisms, individuals stand in a continual
interface with the social environment, which can either
support and facilitate the unfolding of this natural
growth process or block it by frustrating people’s basic
psychological needs [1] for autonomy (i.e., experiencing
a sense of psychological freedom), competence (i.e.,
experiencing a sense of effectance) and relatedness (i.e.,
experiencing a sense of intimacy and connectedness).
The articulation of this meta-theory provides the foun-
dation for developing a formal theory in a systematic,
research-driven way within the top-down approach. New
ideas get naturally and steadily integrated into the theory
following sufficient empirical support, which helps the
theory to maintain internal consistency. To use a
metaphor, theory development with the top-down
approach resembles the construction of a puzzle [12].
Over the years, new pieces of the puzzle get only added
once their fit is determined. Such evolution seems to
typify the development of SDT, whose five mini-theories
(i.e., cognitive evaluation theory, organismic integration
theory, causality orientation theory, basic psychological
need theory, and goal content theory) have been gradu-
ally developed over the past four decades [12]. As the
theoretical puzzle is growing, over time, the theory might
be perceived as highly complex. However, when the
internal logic of the theory is fully understood, SDT is
characterized by a sense of parsimony and elegance, as a
minimum set of concepts is used to explain a wide vari-
ety of phenomena across age groups, life domains, and
cultures. This is because new pieces are added to the the-
ory when (a) the new piece represents a “compelling the-
oretical necessity”, that is, when a clear and meaningful
argument can be provided for the enlargement of the
theory, and (b) when sufficient empirical support is gath-
ered for the theoretical claim. To illustrate, whereas the
satisfaction of the basic needs for autonomy and compe-
tence was considered critical for the maintenance and
development of intrinsic motivation [13], it is only when
the process of internalization - that is, the personal
endorsement of externally offered norms, values and reg-
ulations - was studied that the basic need for relatedness
received a more prominent place [1]. Indeed, people
often engage in enjoyable and intrinsically motivating
activities by themselves (e.g., reading), that is, without
significant others being present to support them, while
the development of satisfying relations is critical for indi-
viduals to fully endorse and willingly subscribe (i.e., inter-
nalize) to norms and behaviors they don’t particularly
find interesting, and, as a result would not spontaneously
engage in [1,12]. Because most health related behaviors
(e.g., stopping smoking, getting a mammogram to screen
for cancer) fall into this category, SDT-based interven-
tions involve the facilitation of internalization through
the support of relatedness in addition to autonomy and
competence. Several studies have confirmed the impor-
tance of relatedness satisfaction for the internalization
process [1].
Due to the focus on the explanatory processes underly-
ing change in the top-down approach, it becomes possi-
ble to a priori predict specific social-contextual variables
that promote change. Within SDT, for instance, counse-
lors are encouraged to support clients’ basic psychologi-
cal needs as much as possible as the experience of need
satisfaction leads to a greater integration and anchoring
of change into one’s life style and values, resulting in
maintained change [14]. More specifically, the concept of
basic need satisfaction allows delineating specific moti-
vating counseling techniques (e.g., shared agenda setting,
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 2 of 11

choice etc.) and orientations (e.g., empathic style, uncon-
ditional regard) (see Patrick & Williams this issue for a
more elaborated discussion). Dozens of self-report and
experimental studies within SDT have studied such spe-
cific need-supportive practices. To illustrate, choice pro-
vision is considered as a key strategy to support
participants’ volition. Such need-supportive strategies
were first studied in the laboratory where typically uni-
versity students would serve as study participants [15,16].
Based on these basic lab-based findings, studies were set
up to test the role of choice across several real world
domains where it was found to yield manifold advan-
tages, including the facilitation of heart disease manage-
ment among senior women (> 60 years; [17]), the
reduction of drop-out rates among eating disorder clients
[18], the promotion of well-being among elderly who stay
in nursing homes [19], and the increase of vitality among
students in PE classes [20,21]. Thus, real-life experiments
complemented the initial laboratory studies, thereby
increasing the ecological validity of the theory.
Based on the examination of different experimentally
isolated need-supportive components (e.g., choice, ratio-
nale provision, etc.) and the development of reliable mea-
sures to assess theoretical constructs, SDT scholars more
recently proceeded to set up controlled clinical trials in
which a theory-driven intervention is tested against a
control group. An SDT driven intervention was com-
posed by combining previously isolated need-supportive
components. For instance, while rationale provision
[22,23], empathy [24], and autonomy-supportive vs. con-
trolling language [25,26] had been examined in isolation
in experimental studies, these and other need-supportive
facets were taken together to create a need-supportive
intervention. Over the past several years, an increasing
number of SDT based controlled clinical trials in a wide
variety of domains, including physical activity ([27], For-
tier, Duda, Guerin, & Teixeira, this issue), tobacco depen-
dence [28], dental care [29] and weight loss [30] have
been conducted [31]. The advantage of such controlled
clinical trials is that they further confirmed the ecological
(or external) validity of SDT in the real world, and estab-
lished the efficacy of the interventions.
However, this intervention research is still in its infancy
phase and, hence, various issues deserve further atten-
tion. First, because various need-supportive components
are simultaneously manipulated in controlled clinical
trials, it remains unclear which of the components are
driving the observed effects, an observation that also
applies to MI. Future studies may want to isolate these
various need-supportive components, as done by Deci,
Eghrari, Patrick, and Leone [24] and Sheldon and Filak
[32] in laboratory studies as to examine main and inter-
action effects between those isolated components. This
would help to answer the question whether the whole is
more than the sum of various need-supportive compo-
nents; for instance, within SDT, it is maintained that for
competence support to yield a truly vitalizing effect such
competence support is best provided in an autonomy-
supportive rather than controlling way [25], thus suggest-
ing that positive feedback and autonomy-supportive lan-
guage can best be simultaneously provided. Second, the
efficacy and effectiveness of a SDT intervention relative
to other psychotherapeutic approaches has not exten-
sively been examined yet, as most of the available con-
trolled clinical trials contrast the experimental group
with a no-treatment control group.
Third, although various key ingredients of a need-sup-
portive intervention have now been identified (see Patrick
& Williams, this issue), this list remains open for additions
and refinements. This is because within a top-down
approach as SDT cross-fertilization between basic labora-
tory studies and (experimental) field studies is pursued.
Through laboratory studies, the effects of isolated need-
supportive components can be examined, which then
might provide the basis for refining the intervention
approach. To illustrate, although choice has on average a
motivating and vitalizing impact, laboratory studies [33]
have demonstrated that choice can be provided in a con-
trolling rather than an informational way such that partici-
pants do not experience a subjective sense of choice,
willingness, and psychological freedom in spite of being
offered an objective array of options to choose from. Also,
an overload of options to choose from has been found to
undermine the motivating impact of choice as people are
less likely to feel effective to make an accurate choice in
such a case [34].
Such research is likely to have important counseling
implications: although a clinician might at the surface
offer a client who hesitates to stop therapy the choice to
do so, the client might feel pressured to continue the
counseling if this choice is provided in a controlling and
anxiety-provoking way (e.g., “it is up to you to choose to
leave treatment or to stay but I can tell you that many cli-
ents who leave treatment fail to make it on their own”).
Regarding the issue of option overload, although a doctor
might provide a number of options to a client how to deal
with his situation, the client, already anxious about his
health condition, might feel overwhelmed and not have
the energy to process all of the information independently.
In such a situation, the autonomy-enhancing effect of
choice would be diminished by its anxiety-inducing and
competence-thwarting effects. What is important in such
a situation is not to take away the choice, but to structure
the situation such that the provided options become man-
ageable for the client so that he ultimately feels competent
to choose and fully endorse one option.
Such basic experimental research is considered funda-
mental within SDT as it helps to understand how
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 3 of 11

social-contextual factors can simultaneously affect the
satisfaction of multiple basic needs. This basic research
provides more detailed insight in the need-supportive
practices that are characteristic for a SDT intervention
and the way how they need to be introduced during
counseling to be optimally motivating.
MI’s Bottom-up Approach
Within a bottom-up approach, the starting point for
creating interventions is quite different. First, interven-
tions may be driven by increased prevalence or incidence
of particular problems or pathologies. For instance, an
increasing number of individuals have developed a seden-
tary lifestyle and currently suffer from overweight and
obesity [35], while a substantial percentage of individuals
display low body satisfaction [36], anorexia nervosa or
bulimia [37] and roughly 20% of U.S. adults smoke [38].
Also, the personal, social and societal costs associated
with a particular pathology might prompt a call for
action. A second driver of bottom-up can be intervention
failure of current approaches or the relative advantage of
new approaches, which then form the impetus for setting
up interventions.
Within the bottom-up approach, developers are very
open to modify their model as they don’t have a strong
theoretical foundation. More specifically, bottom-up
intervention development can involve three different
approaches to incorporating theory. First, developers
might adopt an a-theoretical approach, that is, they do
not concern themselves with why their intervention may
work instead they may focus solely on whether the inter-
vention works. Second, developers can incorporate the-
ory in a discovery-based fashion, that is, they build their
model as they discover new findings and as their experi-
ence grows. Third, developers can seek inspiration in
existing theories to explain why their interventions are
effective. Different portions of multiple existing theories
are then eclectically combined into a new model. We use
MI to illustrate the latter two approaches to theory: MI’s
development seems to be discovery-based and eclectic at
the same time, thereby drawing on multiple theories,
including SDT.
The term model is often used by scholars and clinicians
working from the MI perspective [6], which reflects the
fact that MI primarily is a clinical method and was not
developed from any dedicated theory. Indeed, the devel-
opment of MI can, to some extent, be described as a dis-
covery trip. For instance, MI evolved from the experience
that confronting alcoholics was counterproductive, while
being empathic and understanding facilitated abstinence
[39,40]. Those initial observations resulted in the first
steps in developing a motivational model to promote
internally driven change [41]. Over the past two decades
[6], the key principles characterizing MI (being empathic,
rolling with resistance, promoting change talk, and
enhancing self-efficacy) as well as the specific communi-
cation techniques that help to put those principles in
practice have been extensively described and elaborated
(see Resnicow, this issue).
Further, dozens of randomized controlled trials in very
diverse populations have demonstrated the effectiveness
of MI as a clinical method, both in contrast to ‘weak’
comparison groups (e.g., waitlist or no treatment groups)
and, in some cases, even compared to active treatments
rooted in a psychotherapeutic approach (see the meta-
analyses of [42-46]). Whereas MI was initially tested in
the fields of alcohol and drug use, the range of domains
in which it has been tested has been dramatically
extended to include tobacco dependence, physical activ-
ity, diabetes, dieting, medication adherence, HIV and STI
behaviors, heart disease risk reduction, sexual offending,
and weight loss. Furthermore, MI has been used as a pre-
lude to various other psychotherapeutic approaches (e.g.,
CBT; [47,48]). Nonetheless, MI’s bottom-up approach
seems to have limited its application to health-related or
clinical situations, while SDT, as a macro-theory of moti-
vation, has been tested in other life domains as well (e.g.,
education, sport, parenting, work, etc.).
Despite the substantial evidence for effectiveness in the
health care and clinical domain, it is only recently that MI
scholars have started to pay attention to ‘how and why MI
works’ [6]. The post-hoc articulation of these underlying
processes might be more characteristic of models that are
developed bottom-up, because such models don’t start
from a strong theoretical foundation. Since Miller and
Rollnick’s call for process oriented research, the mechan-
isms that might be responsible for the observed positive
effects of MI have received more empirical attention
[49,50]. In our view, these mechanisms were, just as the
counseling approach itself, discovered posteriori rather
than being a priori theorized. Having noticed that a MI
intervention among drug abuse users failed to yield desire
positive effects [51], Amrhein, a psycholinguist collaborat-
ing with Miller, deconstructed and analyzed the naturally
occurring change and resistance talk used by clients. He
proposed a taxonomy involving different types of change
talk (e.g., desire, reason, ability, commitment, need and
readiness), mapping out the moment during a therapeutic
session when such change talk was expressed as well as its
rate. Analyses pointed out that an increasing use of com-
mitment change talk throughout a MI session, with no
drops toward the end of the session, was predictive of
abstinence during the subsequent year [52]. The trajectory
and type of change talk that was most predictive of absti-
nence was not a priori hypothesized, thus suggesting that
the mechanism underlying change was also discovered.
Subsequent work then established further evidence for
this proposed mechanism of change [50].
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 4 of 11

Considering the Potential for Systematic Integration
between MI and SDT
Most recently, Miller and Rose [3] argued that it is time
to begin to move toward a theory of motivational inter-
viewing and thus suggested, at least indirectly, that MI
can move beyond its bottom-up origins to extend beyond
a practice-driven model. Their call for a theory of MI was
justified by the fact that both the effectiveness of MI as a
clinical method and the mechanisms underlying its
observed positive effects have been established. It is note-
worthy that Miller and Rose [3] were proposing an
“emerging theory of MI” (p. 527) because many questions
still remain unanswered. For instance, as noted by Miller
and Rose [3]), “if the client elicitation of change talk is
reliably linked to commitment and behavior change, why
is that so?” (p. 534; original italizing). To address this
issue and for MI to become a theory rather than remain
a model, we believe it is critical to specify its meta-theo-
retical basis, to clarify its theoretical (dis)similarity with
existing theories, and to clearly identify the underlying
psychological mechanism of change.
Throughout its discovery-driven development, MI has
been linked to a multitude of theories, including Festin-
ger’s [53] cognitive dissonance theory, Bem’s [54] self-
perception theory, and Roger’s [55] client-centered
approach. For instance, Miller and Rose [3] identify
therapist empathy and the Rogerian-based spirit of MI as
one of the active components of MI. Most recently, sev-
eral scholars [8,9] have argued that SDT and MI can
potentially be wed because of (a) their complimentary
character and (b) their shared features. Such a marriage
would allow for a better understanding of the motiva-
tional dynamics among a diversity of clinical populations,
such as clients with acute suicidal ideation [56] and part-
ner-abusive men [57]. Yet, in our reading of the MI lit-
erature, the founders of MI have not fully acknowledged
this potential for systematic integration [3], perhaps
because they overlooked the papers that argue for such
an integration.
Regarding the complimentarity between MI and SDT,
the motivational communication techniques practiced
within MI can inform SDT practitioners. On the other
hand, SDT’s focus on basic need satisfaction and the
internalization of the reason for change allows one to
better understand the processes underlying the effective-
ness of MI [8,9]. In line with these claims, Fuemmeler et
al. [58] reported that an intervention rooted in MI to
increase fruit and vegetable consumption promoted a
more autonomous regulation. Similarly, in a randomized
trial among counseling clients with type 2 diabetes,
Rubak et al. [59] found that clients in their MI based
intervention group had more strongly self-endorsed (i.e.,
internalized) the importance of diabetes self-management
behaviors at a one year follow-up compared with the
clients from the control group. Both groups were being
taught intensive treatment of their diabetes.
Notably, MI researchers have not examined the isolated
effects of various MI communication techniques in their
controlled clinical trials (but see [60]). Such a decon-
struction, which has been done in some SDT laboratory
[24] and field studies [61], would be worthwhile for both
MI and SDT researchers because it would generate more
precise insight in the specific components of a MI inter-
vention that carry the effect on proposed SDT based
mediators (i.e., basic need satisfaction), MI based media-
tors (i.e., change talk) and the targeted behavioral and
health outcomes. This approach would help to gain
insight in which specific communication techniques
energize behavior and, as a result, it might lead to refine-
ment of existing MI techniques, and SDT interventions.
Regarding their shared theoretical focus, both MI and
SDT can both be at least partially traced back to their
humanistic and client-centered underpinnings [6,7,62,63]
and [64]. Further, in various writings of Miller and Roll-
nick [6,7] and Deci and Ryan [1] - the founders of MI
and SDT, respectively - the issue of autonomy and voli-
tion has been repeatedly emphasized. Yet, we note three
differences between the SDT and MI view on autonomy.
A first difference concerns the differentiation between
autonomy and independence within SDT [65-68], while
it is unclear whether such a differentiation is made within
MI. It is important to differentiate autonomy, as defined
within SDT, from independence, because several clini-
cians suggest supporting autonomy could be harmful
because they may interpret autonomy as independent
decision making [69]. The opposite of independence is
dependence in which case clients rely on the advice and
help of counselor to resolve their problems. A smoker
who decides to and succeeds in quitting smoking by him-
self functions independently, while the smoker who relies
on the help and advice of a doctor displays dependent
functioning. However, both the self-quitter as well as the
doctor-dependent quitter might be quitting for autono-
mous and volitional or for controlled and pressuring rea-
sons. Thus, the opposite of autonomy within SDT is not
dependence but heteronomy, in which case clients’
change behaviors are determined by internally or exter-
nally pressuring forces. More generally, this conceptual
refinement suggests that it is critical to distinguish the
source of the decision making process (i.e., deciding by
oneself vs. deciding with the help of others) from the
phenomenological experience underlying the decision
making process. Based on previous research in the
domains of parenting [67,70] and emerging adulthood
[71] and SDT, one can predict that especially the autono-
mous and controlling reasons underlying one’s (in)
dependent functioning rather than the independent vs.
dependent functioning per se would be predictive of
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 5 of 11

clinical success. Thus, a doctor-dependent quitter who
willingly relies on the help of his doctor might be as suc-
cessful as self-quitter who choose to quit by himself,
while controlled self- and doctor-dependent quitters are
more likely to relapse over time.
Second, because SDT incorporates autonomy (i.e., voli-
tion) as a critical theoretical process in its own right,
adherence to externally established behavioral goals is con-
sidered an incomplete outcome measure. Volitionally non-
adherent [72] participants need to be included as a positive
outcome to the volitionally adherent for the effectiveness
of an SDT intervention to be assessed [73], while it is
unclear whether a similar position is maintained within
MI. The argumentation to include autonomous non-
adherence as a valuable outcome is consistent with medi-
cine’s professional charter [74] and biomedical ethics [75]
which include respect for autonomy an equivalent out-
come to enhancing wellbeing as an outcome. Thus, since
clients have the right to choose to be non-adherent, the
outcomes of clinical encounters are positive if the clini-
cians have supported clients’ autonomous (or informed)
decisions to not accept recommended treatments, and life-
style changes [76].
To achieve the outcome of autonomous disengagement
clinicians would need to bring the client into a position
where he can take a well-informed decision. To do so, the
clinician would collaboratively discuss pros and cons of
change and provide information among other things so
that the client can, after reflection, endorse the decision to
engage either in the recommended behavior change or
treatment course or postpone the change to a later
moment. For instance, at the end of a doctor visit a smo-
ker might decide autonomously not to pursue change in
the coming three months because he anticipates various
life stressors that might trigger his smoking behavior. To
further ensure that the patient acts autonomously, the
doctor would then ask the client if the doctor provided
behavioral counseling, interpersonal support, or medica-
tions to facilitate the client’s perceived competence to suc-
cessfully manage those stressors without tobacco. If the
client still declined setting a quit date, the doctor would
ask permission to bring up the issue of quitting during a
new visit after this smoking period. By respecting a client
for autonomously disengaging from change, it might
become more probable that the client does pursue change
for autonomous reasons at a later moment [77,38], while
at the same time fulfilling the highest tenets of medical
professionalism [74] and biomedical ethics [75]. Interest-
ingly, this respect for volitional non-adherence is consis-
tent with MI’s principle of rolling with resistance, and may
be facilitative of change talk.
A third difference relates to the way this focus on client
autonomy has arisen; that is, the importance of client
autonomy has been emphasized for different reasons.
Whereas the dynamic of autonomy is said to be univer-
sally important and is thus completely theoretically
anchored within SDT’s top-down perspective, the impor-
tance placed on client autonomy and volition has primar-
ily grown out of clinical experience within MI’s bottom-
up approach. That is, client autonomy was perhaps
valued as it yielded desired outcomes (e.g., less drop-out;
more progression; less relapse), thus constituting a desir-
able attribute of clients.
In spite of the call to incorporate client autonomy,
when defined as volition, as a theoretical principle rather
than just a motivating practice in MI [8,9], Miller and
Rose [3] did not embrace this call in their most recent
theoretical statement of MI. Instead, Miller and Rose
emphasized more strongly the importance of change talk
as one of the active components that drive the effective-
ness of MI. We argue, however, that for a deeper and sys-
tematic integration [78] between MI and SDT to take
place MI scholars might want to accept the idea that cli-
ent autonomy, when defined as the experience of volition
and psychological freedom, represents a basic human
need. The endorsement of the theoretical principle of
autonomy would imply that MI scholars fully embrace
SDT’s organismic-dialectical meta-theory. In the follow-
ing, we discuss the advantages of considering autonomy
as a fundamental human need.
The Advantages of Recognizing Autonomy as a
Fundamental Human Need and a Theoretical Principle
The recognition that autonomy or volition represent a
fundamental human need and a theoretical principle (a)
allows avoiding an instrumental approach of MI and cli-
ent autonomy, (b) allows analyzing change talk within MI
in a theory-driven way, thereby distinguishing between
different types of change talk, and (c) helps to address
the question of whether all clients benefit from autonomy
support or whether some clients would benefit more
from a directive approach based on their personal prefer-
ence for being directed to recommended behaviors and
treatments.
Avoiding an Instrumental Approach of MI and Autonomy
Over the past decade, MI has attracted a lot of attention
among counselors coming from different psychothera-
peutic schools, presumably because MI is perceived as a
useful approach to increase client adherence. As a result,
MI has been combined with various psychotherapeutic
(e.g., cognitive-behavioral) approaches [79]. In those
cases, a couple of MI sessions serve as an ‘add-on’ or
‘prelude’ prior to the provision of a series of counseling
sessions that are grounded in a particular psychothera-
peutic school.
Such an approach is fully in line with Miller and
Rollnick’s argument that MI does not represent a
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 6 of 11

psychotherapeutic school in itself and thus can be used
in conjunction with various other approaches. Never-
theless, considering MI as a ‘prelude’ might lead to
instrumental approach of MI; that is, MI might some-
times be treated as a means that helps in reaching
desired ends (i.e., promoting health outcomes) and
increasing client autonomy is the instrumental pathway
to do so. When instrumentally approached, MI in gen-
eral and client autonomy support in particular might
get reduced to a set of techniques, perhaps, even manip-
ulations, that one uses to get the client moving in a par-
ticular direction. However, Miller and Rollnick [7]
strongly argued against such practice, thereby emphasiz-
ing that MI does not represent a technique as the mere
application of MI techniques while ignoring its underly-
ing spirit does not represent MI. We believe such an
instrumental approach of MI and client autonomy will
be more easily avoided if one embraces the idea of
autonomy as a fundamental basic need that deserves
respect in its own right, regardless of the outcomes it
might entail. Indeed, a client might sense that a counse-
lor is promoting autonomy with the sole aim of increas-
ing subsequent adherence and, hence, the counselor
would likely be experienced as controlling, and not be
experienced as autonomy-supportive, or relationship-
supportive. Instead, the idea is that the counselor tries
to support the client’s autonomy as a valuable goal in its
own right, whether doing so increases the chance for
adherence to the recommended behavior or not. Client
autonomy is thus valued as an end, or a outcome, in and
of itself. The increase in adherence that results from an
autonomy-supportive style would thus not be the focal
goal of being autonomy-supportive but it would be a by-
product that follows from an autonomy-supportive style.
To avoid such an instrumental approach of MI and
the concept of autonomy, we believe that it is critical to
combine MI with psychotherapeutic approaches that
share a similar meta-theoretical foundation. If not, the
clinical MI practices in the early sessions might at some
points conflict with the clinical practices used during
the subsequent sessions. For instance, although client
autonomy might be fully respected in the early MI-
based sessions, some counselors, when trying to ensure
continued adherence during the subsequent sessions,
might turn towards rewards or contracting clients,
which might compromise the client’s autonomy and
volition. However, counselors who are working within a
psychotherapeutic school (e.g., client-centered psy-
chotherapy) that fully endorses the principle of client
autonomy would not rely on autonomy-thwarting prac-
tices during the post-MI counseling sessions and, hence,
no confusion would arise for the clients between the
initial MI and subsequent sessions grounded in another
approach.
A Qualitative Analysis of Change Talk
As noted, the identification of mediating mechanisms
accounting for the positive effects of MI largely consti-
tuted a discovery trip rather than being an a priori theo-
rized endeavor. For instance, it was discovered that only
particular types of change talk (i.e., commitment lan-
guage) were predictive of abstinence [52]. The examina-
tion of this change talk can, however, also occur in a
more theory-driven fashion. Several of the change talk
categories (i.e., commitment, desire, need, readiness, and
reasons) as distinguished by Amrheim et al. [52] could be
differently approached from concept of autonomy or
volition as defined within SDT. For each of these cate-
gories, Amrheim et al. [52] assigned a greater value if the
client more strongly verbally expressed his commitment,
desire, need or readiness to change; thus, a higher value
reflected a higher level of motivation to pursue change.
For instance, a verbal change expression as ‘I won’t be
using’, ‘I need to stop’ and ‘I’m ready to do this’ were
assigned a high commitment, need and readiness score.
Although such change talk might be more easily
expressed by autonomously motivated clients it does not
need to be the case. From the SDT perspective, change
talk expressions can also be instigated by controlling
forces and, hence, change talk does not by definition
reflect a willing pursuit of change. For instance, a smoker
who feels guilt for not taking care of his health might
well say that ‘I won’t be using in the future’ or that
‘I need to change my smoking behavior’. Also, autono-
mously and controlled motivated clients might express a
different kind of change talk, with controlling individuals
using more pressuring language and being more rigidly
focused on symptom change (e.g., “I have to lose weight”)
and autonomous clients using more autonomy-suppor-
tive change talk and being more focused on the process
of personality and life style changes (e.g., “It would be
good if I could exercise more"; see [80,81]). Further,
autonomous and controlled clients might verbalize the
same change talk in a different way. For instance, the
emotional tone underlying the change talk might be dif-
ferent, with controlled, relative to autonomously, moti-
vated clients expressing less enthusiasm, more tension
and more negative emotions. Also, whereas controlled
motivated clients’ change talk might be fluctuating
throughout the session, being indicative of self-doubt and
uncertainty, the change talk of autonomously motivated
clients might be less susceptible to momentary changes.
In short, we argue that the concept of autonomy or
volition vs. control or coercion allows for a qualitative
analysis of change talk, thereby examining different cate-
gories of change talk, different ways of expressing change
talk and formulating predictions regarding the variability
vs. stability of change talk within and across sessions. If
future research demonstrates that it is not the quantity of
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 7 of 11

change talk by itself but rather the type of change talk,
the emotional tone and the variability of change talk that
predicts outcomes (e.g., abstinence and well being), it
might suggest that change talk by itself just represents a
surface manifestation of a more fundamental underlying
process, that is, a change towards a more integrated and
volitional model of functioning.
Do Some Clients Benefit from Directive Counseling?
One of the issues often discussed within MI is whether
some clients might benefit from a directive rather than
an autonomy-supportive counseling style, because the
latter style does not align with their preference for direc-
tiveness [82]. Given that autonomy represents an inborn,
universal need, it is maintained within SDT that all cli-
ents will benefit from autonomy-supportive counseling.
The question whether some clients would benefit from
directive counseling is not easily addressed from the SDT
perspective, because this term carries multiple meanings.
Spelling out these different meanings might help to shed
light on an issue that has attracted considerable attention
among MI scholars.
First, directive counseling can refer to coercive counsel-
ing, in which case clients are pushed to adopt a particular
way of thinking, behaving or feeling. In this case, the
term directive counseling is contrasted with autonomy-
supportive counseling, which has the aim of supporting
clients’ volition and willingness to pursue change, thereby
satisfying the basic need for autonomy. Second, the term
directive can also mean providing structure. Structuring
clinicians will provide information and help, educate and
teach skills, thereby supporting the client’s need for com-
petence. When conceptualized in this way, the opposite
of directiveness is not autonomy support, but a laissez-
faire style, where the client is abandoned to himself to
make it alone.
Giving this double meaning of directive counseling, the
question whether some clients might benefit from direc-
tive counseling can be reconsidered. When yielding the
meaning of being coercive and controlling, both MI and
SDT would argue that no client will benefit from being
pushed around. On the basis of SDT, a theoretical
account could be provided for this argument because it is
maintained that all clients possess a basic need for auton-
omy and volition, which gets thwarted when counselors
are controlling.
When directive means providing structure with an
active involvement of client and practitoner, SDT main-
tains that clients might benefit from this structure if it is
provided in an autonomy-supportive rather than a coer-
cive way [83]. Thus, the style of providing information,
teaching skills, and educating will determine whether the
provision of information, education and learning of skills
is experienced as supportive or as controlling. When
clients feel controlled, providing the information likely
prompts a defensive reaction. An example might illus-
trate this. A dietician could begin educating an obese per-
son about which high calorie foods to avoid before asking
what the client knows or if he wants to change. When the
provided information is redundant or undesired, it is
more likely that the client will feel externally pressured
by the dietician to change. Indeed, the structure provided
in this manner is likely to inhibit internalization of the
reason for change and may elicit overt resistance. The
chance then that the client will deeply process the offered
information and integrate this information into his life-
style is low. This attempt at competence-support without
autonomy support is not expected to yield sustained
motivation for change because it is experienced as con-
trol. Instead, when the client expresses a preference for
information, and wants the clinician to tell him what to
do to achieve his goals, the provided information and
competence building will be welcomed and, hence, better
processed and more efficiently applied in practice.
This suggests that clinicians would do well to first
explore whether there is a request for information, skill
teaching or help. This will require empathy and sensitiv-
ity from the side of the clinician, who tries to fully elicit
and acknowledge the client’s perspective. Collabora-
tively, they explore first whether there is willingness to
pursue change and, if so, what the client needs to make
change happen. Thus, the initial autonomy and related-
ness support provided determine whether the counse-
lor’s recommendations and efforts at skill-building and
information provision will be experienced as need-sup-
portive or need-frustrating.
It is striking to us that a similar view is maintained
within MI. Specifically, Resnicow (this issue) suggested
providing information using an ‘elicit-provide-elicit’ frame-
work. The counselor first elicits the person’s understand-
ing and desire for information, then provides new
information in a neutral manner, followed by eliciting
what this information might mean for the client, using a
question such as, “What does this mean to you” or “How
do you make sense of all this?”. MI practitioners avoid try-
ing to persuade clients with “pre-digested” health messages
and instead allow clients to process information and find
what is personally relevant for them. This approach allows
for competence-building, while at the same type respect-
ing client autonomy, as the client is asked how much
information he might desire and what he thinks of newly
provided information.
Thus, SDT and MI converge on how clinicians would
handle the request for information and recommendations
regarding their health, although they use different voca-
bulary for doing so. Also, MI is primarily focused on how
this can be concretely done (e.g., ‘elicit-provide-elicit
practice’), while SDT scholars provide an account of the
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 8 of 11

processes (i.e., basic need satisfaction) underlying these
motivational practices. Thus, it might be worthwhile for
MI scholars to recognize the multiple meanings that the
term ‘directiveness’ carries and to endorse the concept of
autonomy as a theoretical principle. Doing so would
allow researchers in both camps to generate and test
more precise hypotheses that will inform which counsel-
ing practices are more motivating for clients, which result
in greater well being for clients, and why these outcomes
occurred.
Conclusion
Both MI and SDT have received increasing attention in
the literature, with MI being rapidly spread in various
health care domains and SDT being tested in health
care and in a number of additional domains, such as
work, education, sports and exercise, and ecology. We
believe that MI and SDT, although characterized by dif-
ferent starting points and undergoing a different devel-
opment (i.e., bottom-up vs. top-down), can potentially
be integrated with continued careful consideration of
the underlying concepts and their appropriate empirical
validation. For such systematic integration to occur,
though, we maintain that autonomy, defined as the cli-
ents’ experience of a sense of volition and psychological
freedom, needs to be considered as a fundamental
human need and theoretical process, and as a clinical
endpoint by itself. Establishing autonomy as a basic
human need, which the satisfaction of, together with
competence and relatedness, energizes human behavior,
will inform clinicians’ behavior and the structure of
interventions that will enhance integration, wellness,
and growth of the human organism.
Author details
1Department of Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 2Departments
of Medicine and of Clinical and Social Psychology, University of Rochester,
Rochester, USA. 3School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Michigan,
USA.
Authors’ contributions
MV took the lead in writing the manuscript and GW and KR both provided
useful comments to improve the contribution. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 14 July 2010 Accepted: 2 March 2012
Published: 2 March 2012
References
1.
Deci EL, Ryan RM: The ‘what’ and ‘why’ of goal pursuits: Human needs
and the self-determination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry 2000,
11:227-268.
2.
Ryan RM, Deci EL: Self-determination theory and the facilitation of
intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. American
Psychologist 2000, 55:68-78.
3.
Miller WR, Rose GS: Toward a theory of motivational interviewing.
American Psychologist 2009, 64:527-537.
4.
Maciosek MV, Edwards NM, Coffield AB, et al: Priorities among effective
clinical preventive services. American Journal of Preventive Medecine 2006,
31:90-6.
5.
Rothman AJ: “Is there nothing more practical than a good theory?": Why
innovations and advances in health behavior change will arise if
interventions are used to test and refine theory. International Journal of
Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2004, 1:11.
6.
Miller WR, Rollnick S: Motivational interviewing New York: Guilford; 2002.
7.
Miller WR, Rollnick S: Ten things that motivational interviewing is not.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy 2009, 37:129-140.
8.
Markland D, Ryan RM, Tobin VJ, Rollnick S: Motivational interviewing and
self-determination theory. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 2005,
24:811-831.
9.
Vansteenkiste M, Sheldon KM: ’There is nothing more practical than a
good theory’: Integrating motivational interviewing and self-
determination theory. British Journal of Clinical Psychology 2006, 45:63-82.
10.
Lewin K: Field theory in social science: selected theoretical papers by Kurt
Lewin London: Tavistock Publications; 1952.
11.
Deci EL, Vansteenkiste M: Self-determination theory and basic need
satisfaction: Understanding human development in positive psychology.
Ricerche di Psichologia 2004, 27:17-34.
12.
Vansteenkiste M, Niemiec C, Soenens B: The development of the five
mini-theories of self-determination theory: An historical overview,
emerging trends, and future directions. In Advances in Motivation and
Achievement: The Decade Ahead. Volume 16. Edited by: Urdan T, Karabenick
S. UK: Emerald Publishing; 2010:105-166.
13.
Deci EL: Intrinsic motivation New York: Plenum Publishing Co; 1975.
14.
Ryan RM, Deci EL: A self-determination approach to psychotherapy: The
motivational basis for effective change. Canadian Psychology 2008,
49:186-193.
15.
Patall EA, Cooper H, Robinson C: The effects of choice on intrinsic
motivation and related outcomes: A meta-analysis of research findings.
Psychological Bulletin 2008, 134:270-300.
16.
Zuckerman M, Porac JF, Lathin D, Smith R, Deci EL: On the importance of
self-determination for intrinsically motivated behavior. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin 1978, 4:443-446.
17.
Clark NM, Janz NK, Dodge JA, et al: The effect of client choice of
intervention on health outcomes. Contemporary Clinical Trials 2008,
29:679-686.
18.
Vandereycken W, Vansteenkiste M: “Let eating disorder clients decide!":
Providing choice might reduce early drop-out in inclient treatment.
European Eating Disorder Review 2009, 17:177-183.
19.
Philippe FL, Vallerand RJ: Actual environments do affect motivation and
psychological adjustment: A test of self-determination theory in a
natural setting. Motivation & Emotion 2008, 32:81-89.
20.
Mouratidis A, Vansteenkiste M, Lens W, Sideridis G: Class-to-class variation
in vitality and intrinsic motivation in physical education as a function of
the synergistic interaction between need-supportive teaching and
pupils’ motivational orientations. Journal of Educational Psychology 2011.
21.
Ward J, Wilkinson C, Graser SV, Prusak KA: Effects of choice on student
motivation and physical activity behavior in physical education. Journal
of Teaching in Physical Education 2008, 27:385-398.
22.
Jang H: Supporting students’ motivation, engagement, and learning
during an uninteresting activity. Journal of Educational Psychology 2008,
100:798-811.
23.
Koestner R, Ryan RM, Bernieri F, Holt K: Setting limits on children’s
behavior: The differential effects of controlling versus informational
styles on children’s intrinsic motivation and creativity. Journal of
Personality 1984, 54:233-248.
24.
Deci EL, Eghrari H, Patrick BC, Leone DR: Facilitating internalization: The
self-determination theory perspective. Journal of Personality 1994,
62:119-142.
25.
Ryan RM: Control and information in the intrapersonal sphere: An
extension of cognitive evaluation theory. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 1982, 43:450-461.
26.
Vansteenkiste M, Simons J, Lens W, Sheldon KM, Deci EL: Motivating
learning, performance, and persistence: The synergistic role of intrinsic
goals and autonomy-support. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2004, 87:246-260.
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 9 of 11

27.
Chatzisarantis NLD, Hagger MS: Effects of an intervention based on Self-
Determination Theory on self-reported leisure-time physical activity
participation. Psychology and Health 2009, 24:29-48.
28.
Williams GC, McGregor H, Sharp D, Levesque CS, Kouides RW, Ryan RM,
Deci EL: Testing a self-determination theory intervention for motivating
tobacco cessation: Supporting autonomy and competence in a clinical
trial. Health Psychology 2006, 25:91-101.
29.
Halvari AEM, Halvari H: Motivational predictors of change in oral health:
An experimental test of self-determination theory. Motivation and
Emotion 2006, 30:295-306.
30.
Silva MN, Vieira PN, Coutinho SR, Minderico CS, Matos MG, Sardinha LS,
Teixeira PJ: Using self-determination theory to promote physical activity
and weight control: a randomized controlled trial in women. Journal of
Behavioral Medicine 2010, 33:110-122.
31.
Ryan RM, Patrick H, Deci EL, Williams GC: Facilitating health behaviour
change and its maintenance: Interventions based on self-determination
theory. The European Health Psychologist 2008, 10:2-5.
32.
Sheldon KM, Filak V: Manipulating autonomy, competence, and
relatedness support in a game-learning context: New evidence that all
three needs matter. British Journal of Social Psychology 2008, 47:267-283.
33.
Moller AC, Deci EL, Ryan RM: Choice and ego-depletion: The moderating
role of autonomy. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 2006,
32:1024-1036.
34.
Iyengar SS, Lepper MR: When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too
much of a good thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2000,
79:995-1006.
35.
Ogden CL, Yanovski SZ, Carroll MD, Flegal KM: The epidemiology of
obesity. Gastroenterology 2007, 132:2087-2102.
36.
Ricciardelli LA, McCabe P: Dietery restraint and negative affect as
mediators of body dissatisfaction and bulimic behavior in adolescent
girls and boys. Behavior Research and Therapy 2001, 39:1317-1328.
37.
Hoek HW, van Hoeken D: Review of the prevalence and incidence of
eating disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders 2003, 34:383-396.
38.
Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, Bailey WC, Benowitz NL, Curry SJ, et al: Treating
Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services; 2008.
39.
Miller WR, Baca LM: Two-year follow-up of bibliotherapy and therapist-
dircted controlled drinking training for problem drinkers. Behavior
Therapy 1983, 14:441-448.
40.
Miller WR, Taylor CA, West JC: Focused versus broad spectrum behavior
therapy for problem drinkers. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
1980, 48:509-601.
41.
Miller WR: Motivational interviewing with problem drinkers. Behavioural
Psychotherapy 1983, 11:147-172.
42.
Burke BL, Arkowitz H, Menchola M: The efficacy of motivational
interviewing: A meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 2003, 71:843-61.
43.
Hettema J, Steele J, Miller WR: Motivational interviewing. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology 2005, 1:91-111.
44.
Lundahl BW, Tollefson D, Kunz C, Brownell C, Burke B: Meta-analysis of
motivational interviewing: Twenty five years of research. Research on
Social Work Practice 2010, 20:137-160.
45.
Rubak S, Sandboek A, Lauritzen T, Christensen B: Motivational interviewing:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of General Practice
2005, 81:305-312.
46.
Vasilaki EI, Hosier SG, Cox WM: The efficacy of motivational interviewing
as a brief intervention for excessive drinking: A meta-analytic review.
Alcohol and Alcoholism 2006, 41:328-335.
47.
Brenman L, Walkley J, Fraser SF, Greenway K, Wilks R: Motivational
interviewing and cognitive behavior therapy in the treatment of
adolescent overweight and obesity: Study design and methodology.
Contemporary Clinical Trial 2008, 29:359-375.
48.
Dean HY, Touyz SW, Rieger E, Thornton CE: Group motivational
enhancement therapy as an adjunct to inpatient treatment for eating
disorders: A preliminary study. European Eating Disorders Review 2008,
16:256-267.
49.
Moyers TB, Martin T: Therapist influence on client language during
motivational interviewing sessions: Support for a potential causal
mechanism. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 2006, 30:245-251.
50.
Moyers TB, Martin T, Christopher PJ, Houck JM, Tonigan JS, Amrhein PC:
Client language as a mediator of motivational interviewing efficacy:
Where is the evidence? Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 2007,
31:40-47.
51.
Miller WR, Yahne CE, Tonigan JS: Motivational interviewing in drug abuse
services: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 2003, 71:754-763.
52.
Amrhein PC, Miller WR, Yahne CE, Paler M, Fulcher L: Client commitment
language during motivational interviewing predicts drug use outcomes.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 2001, 71:862-878.
53.
Festinger L: A theory of cognitive dissonance Standford, CA: Standford
University Press; 1957.
54.
Bem DJ: Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive
dissonance phenomena. Psychological Review 1967, 74:183-200.
55.
Rogers CR: Client-centered therapy Boston: Houghton-Mifflin; 1951.
56.
Britton PC, Williams GC, Conner KR: Self-determination theory,
motivational interviewing, and the treatment of clients with acute
suicidal ideation. Journal of Clinical Psychology 2008, 64:52-66.
57.
Neighbors C, Roffman RA, Bmilinyi LF, Edleson JL: Self determination
theory and motivational interviewing: Complementary models to elicit
voluntary engagement by partner-abusive men. American Journal of
Family Therapy 2008, 36:126-136.
58.
Fuemmeler BF, Masse LC, Yaroch AL, Resnicow K, Campbell MK, Carr C,
et al: Psychosocial mediation of fruit and vegetable consumption in the
Body and Soul effectiveness trial. Health Psychology 2006, 25:474-83.
59.
Rubak S, Sandboek A, Lauritzen T, Borch-Johnsen K, Christensen B: General
practitioners trained in motivational interviewing can positively affect
the attitude to behaviour change in people with type 2 diabetes.
Scandinavian Journal of Primary Health Care 2009, 27:172-179.
60.
Glynn LH, Moyers TB: Chasing change talk: The clinician’s role in evoking
client language about change. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatmen 2010,
39:65-70.
61.
Reeve J, Bolt E, Cai Y: Autonomy-supportive teachers: How they teach
and motivate students. Journal of Educational Psychology 1999, 91:537-548.
62.
Patterson PG, Joseph S: Person-centered personality theory: Support from
self-determination theory and positive psychology. Journal of Humanistic
Psychology 2007, 47:117-139.
63.
Sheldon KM, Kasser T: Goals, congruence, and positive well-being: New
empirical validation for humanistic ideas. Journal of Humanistic Psychology
2001, 41:30-50.
64.
Williams GC, Frankel RM, Campbell TL, Deci EL: Research on relationship-
centered care and health-care outcomes from the Rochester
Biopsychosocial Program: A self-determination theory integration.
Families, Systems & Health 2000, 18:79-90.
65.
Chirkov V, Ryan RM, Kim Y, Kaplan U: Differentiating autonomy from
individualism and independence: A self-determination theory
perspective on internalization of cultural orientations and well-being.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2003, 84:97-110.
66.
Ryan RM: Agency and organization: Intrinsic motivation, autonomy and
the self in psychological development. In Nebraska symposium on
motivation: Developmental perspectives on motivation. Volume 40. Edited by:
Jacobs J. Lincoln, NE: University Of Nebraska Press; 1993:1-56.
67.
Soenens B, Vansteenkiste M, Lens W, Luyckx K, Beyers W, Goossens L,
Ryan RM: Conceptualizing parental autonomy support: Adolescent
perceptions of promoting independence versus promoting volitional
functioning. Developmental Psychology 2007, 43:633-646.
68.
Vansteenkiste M, Zhou M, Lens W, Soenens B: Experiences of autonomy
and control among Chinese learners: Vitalizing or immobilizing? Journal
of Educational Psychology 2005, 97:468-483.
69.
Epstein RM, Korones DN, Quill TE: Withholding information from patients -
when less is more. New England Journal of Medicine 2010, 362:380-381.
70.
Soenens B, Vansteenkiste M, Sierens E: How are parental psychological
control and autonomy-support related? Naturally occurring profiles of
psychological control and two types of autonomy-support. Journal of
Marriage and the Family 2009, 71:187-202.
71.
Kins E, Beyers W, Soenens B, Vansteenkiste M: Patterns of home leaving
subjective well-being in emerging adulthood: The role of motivational
processes and parental autonomy support. Developmental Psychology
2009, 45:1416-1429.
72.
Vansteenkiste M, Lens W, Dewitte S, De Witte H, Deci EL: The “why” and
“why not” of job search behavior: Their relation to searching,
unemployment experience and well-being. European Journal of Social
Psychology 2004, 34:345-363.
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 10 of 11

73.
Ryan RM, Lynch MF, Vansteenkiste M, Deci EL: Motivation and autonomy
in counseling, psychotherapy, and behavior change: A look at theory
and practice. Counseling Psychologist 2011, 39:193-260.
74.
ABIM Foundation, ACP-ASIM Foundation, European Federation of Internal
Medicine: Medical professionalism in the new millennium: A physician
charter. Annals of Internal Medicine 2002, 136:243-6.
75.
Beauchamp TL, Childress JF: Principles of biomedical ethics New York: Oxford
University Press; 2009.
76.
Woolf SH, Chan ECY, Harris R, Sheridan SL, Braddock CH, Kaplan RM, et al:
Promoting informed choice: Transforming health care to dispense
knowledge for decision making. Annals of Internal Medicine 2005,
143:293-300.
77.
Williams GC, Quill TE, Deci EL, Ryan RM: The facts concerning the recent
carnival of smoking in Connecticut (and elsewhere). Annals of Internal
Medicine 1991, 115:59-63.
78.
Patterson CH: Foundations for a systematic eclectic psychotherapy.
Psychotherapy 1989, 26:427-435.
79.
Buckner JD, Schmidt NB: A randomized pilot study of motivation
enhancement therapy to increase utilization of cognitive-behavioral
therapy for social anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy 2009,
47:710-715.
80.
Conroy DE, Coatsworth JD: Coaching behaviors asociated with changes in
fear of failure: Changes in self-talk and need satisfaction as potential
mechansims. Journal of Personality 2007, 75:383-419.
81.
Oliver EJ, Markland D, Hardy J, Petherick CM: The effects of autonomy-
supportive versus controlling environments on self-talk. Motivation &
Emotion 2008, 32:200-212.
82.
K Resnicow R, Davis G, Zhang J, Konkel V, Strecher A, Shaikh D, Tolsma J,
Calvi G, Alexander J, Anderson C, Wiese : Tailoring a fruit and vegetable
intervention on novel motivational constructs: results of a randomized
study. Annual Behavioral Medicine 2008, 35:159-169.
83.
Sierens E, Vansteenkiste M, Goossens L, Soenens B, Dochy F: The
synergistic relationship of perceived autonomy-support and structure in
the prediction of self-regulated learning. British Journal of Educational
Psychology 2009, 79:57-68.
doi:10.1186/1479-5868-9-23
Cite this article as: Vansteenkiste et al.: Toward systematic integration
between Self-Determination Theory and Motivational Interviewing as
examples of top-down and bottom-up intervention development:
Autonomy or volition as a fundamental theoretical principle.
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012 9:23.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Vansteenkiste et al. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 2012, 9:23
http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/9/1/23
Page 11 of 11
