Microrandomized Trials: An Experimental Design for Developing
Just-in-Time Adaptive Interventions
Predrag Klasnja
University of Michigan
Eric B. Hekler
Arizona State University
Saul Shiffman
University of Pittsburgh
Audrey Boruvka, Daniel Almirall, Ambuj Tewari,
and Susan A. Murphy
University of Michigan
Objective: This article presents an experimental design, the microrandomized trial, developed to support
optimization of just-in-time adaptive interventions (JITAIs). JITAIs are mHealth technologies that aim
to deliver the right intervention components at the right times and locations to optimally support
individuals’ health behaviors. Microrandomized trials offer a way to optimize such interventions by
enabling modeling of causal effects and time-varying effect moderation for individual intervention
components within a JITAI. Method: The article describes the microrandomized trial design, enumerates
research questions that this experimental design can help answer, and provides an overview of the data
analyses that can be used to assess the causal effects of studied intervention components and investigate
time-varying moderation of those effects. Results: Microrandomized trials enable causal modeling of
proximal effects of the randomized intervention components and assessment of time-varying moderation
of those effects. Conclusion: Microrandomized trials can help researchers understand whether their
interventions are having intended effects, when and for whom they are effective, and what factors
moderate the interventions’ effects, enabling creation of more effective JITAIs.
Keywords: microrandomized trials, experimental designs, mHealth, intervention optimization
With the advent of capable, affordable, and user-friendly
mobile devices, mobile health (mHealth) technologies are in-
creasingly being employed to deliver interventions to users in
their natural environments. A common approach is to use the
mobile device to enable users to access health interventions
wherever and whenever they feel they need help. For example,
a person who is trying to quit smoking might access coping
strategies when she is experiencing strong cravings. While
helpful, such “pull” interventions rely on a person to be aware
and motivated to request the intervention during these states of
vulnerability or opportunity (Nahum-Shani, Hekler, & Spruijt-
Metz, 2015).
In contrast, a “push” approach to mHealth interventions makes
use of sensors, self-report, and computer algorithms to decide
when an intervention is needed, and what intervention might be
most appropriate. With the advent of increasingly sophisticated
sensing devices (e.g., GPS) and phone-based ecological momen-
tary assessment (EMA), it is becoming possible to deliver inter-
ventions at moments when they can most readily influence a
person’s behavior. This may be particularly important for promot-
ing healthy behaviors or supporting cessation of unhealthy ones.
For example, for smokers, a moment of temptation to smoke can
be a turning point toward relapse or abstinence. For someone
trying to increase physical activity, moments when the person can
be active are similarly critical decision points when a well-timed
intervention could make a difference. Thus, the potential of
mHealth interventions may be best realized when they can adap-
tively respond to individuals’ actions and states and deliver inter-
vention options that are most needed, when and where they are
most needed (Intille, 2004; Patrick, Griswold, Raab, & Intille,
2008). Such just-in-time adaptive interventions (JITAIs)—mobile
applications with explicit decision rules for when to prompt users
with specific intervention components (e.g., prompt a person re-
covering from substance use to access coping strategies when the
risk score for relapse reaches a threshold value)—hold great
promise for shaping healthy behavior.
Predrag Klasnja, School of Information, University of Michigan; Eric B.
Hekler, School of Nutrition and Health Promotion, Arizona State University;
Saul Shiffman, Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh; Audrey
Boruvka, Department of Statistics, University of Michigan; Daniel Almirall,
Institute of Social Research, University of Michigan; Ambuj Tewari and Susan
A. Murphy, Department of Statistics, University of Michigan.
This 2015 special supplemental issue of Health Psychology is supported
by funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Behav-
ioral and Social Sciences Research (OBSSR) to support the dissemination
of research on eHealth and mHealth interventions, methods, and implica-
tions in the practice of health psychology. This research was generously
supported through the following awards from the National Institutes of
Health: NHLBI grant R01HL12544001, NIBIB grant U54EB020404,
NIDA grant P50-DA-010075, and NIMH grant R03-MH-097954. Dr.
Shiffman holds shares in eRT, a company that provides electronic diary
technology for research.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Predrag
Klasnja, School of Information, University of Michigan, 4364 North Quad,
105 S State Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. E-mail: klasnja@umich.edu
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Health Psychology
© 2015 American Psychological Association
2015, Vol. 34, Supplement, 1220–1228
0278-6133/15/$12.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000305
1220

Technology required for creating JITAIs has been rapidly de-
veloping over the last few years (Hekler, Klasnja, Traver, &
Hendriks, 2013). Wearable sensors for detecting physical activity
and physiological states are now widely available; modern smart-
phones can sense their users’ environment in real time and mine
data from their calendars, email, and other applications. EMA
toolkits like PACO (http://pacoapp.com) enable timely, low-
burden self-report to supplement or disambiguate passively col-
lected information. Interventions that leverage such technologies
can form a rich picture of the users’ momentary context and
activity. For at least some health behaviors, these developments
have made it possible to detect, in real-time, moments when and
where an intervention might need to be delivered.
Despite these technological advances, there are barriers to the
development of effective JITAIs. Among these, limitations in
experimental methodology and theories that guide intervention
design are most significant. Commonly used experimental designs
are not sufficient to support development of JITAIs because they
do not enable researchers to determine empirically when a partic-
ular intervention component should be delivered and whether a
JITAI that was delivered had the intended effect (Kumar et al.,
2013). As such, researchers currently do not have the appropriate
tools to gather evidence for deciding how a JITAI should be
adjusted to make it more effective. In addition, some researchers
have recently argued that the extent to which our behavioral
theories can guide the development of JITAIs is limited (Riley et
al., 2011; Spruijt-Metz & Nilsen, 2014). In particular, although
intervention components included in a JITAI are often based on
our best behavioral theories, with rare exceptions, these theories
currently do not specify dynamics of human behavior at a granular
enough level to guide the design of the decision rules that specify
precisely when particular intervention components should be de-
livered to maximize the likelihood that they will have intended
effects and to optimize the efficacy of the intervention as a whole.
In this paper, we propose an experimental design, the microran-
domized trial (MRT), that overcomes limitations of current exper-
imental methods and can supplement the use of behavioral theory
to guide JITAI development. This experimental design provides
empirical data for optimizing JITAIs by enabling researchers to
study proximal effects of specific intervention components,
changes in these effects over time, and the psychosocial or con-
textual factors that moderate those time-varying effects.
In a JITAI, each intervention component of interest (e.g., daily
step goal in a physical-activity intervention, distraction activities in
a smoking-cessation intervention) is constituted by two or more
intervention options. These options may correspond to variants of
an intervention component or indicate whether an intervention
component is on or off. For example, there may be two options for
a daily step goal, one corresponding to a user-set goal and a second
corresponding to a default, prespecified goal. Similarly, we could
conceptualize a distraction intervention as having two options, one
in which the user is prompted to engage in a distraction activity
(e.g., a video game) when she is experiencing cravings and the
second in which a distraction activity is not suggested. Microran-
domized trials provide data on how the effects of different inter-
vention options—for example, whether, at a time of craving,
quitters smoke less following the delivery of a distraction exercise
than when a distraction exercise is not delivered—change over the
course of intervention use and how time-varying contextual and
psychosocial factors (e.g., the user’s location or level of busyness)
moderate the observed changes in intervention-component effi-
cacy. Findings from a microrandomized trial can thus help deter-
mine decision rules for when and in what circumstances an inter-
vention option should be delivered to optimize its efficacy and the
efficacy of the intervention as a whole. In addition, for intervention
components that embody theoretical constructs from behavioral
science, MRTs help reveal how these theoretical constructs operate
over time and in different contexts.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: we begin by
briefly reviewing currently available methods for intervention op-
timization and discuss why they are insufficient for JITAI devel-
opment. We then describe the microrandomized trial design and
discuss, via an example of a physical-activity intervention we are
currently testing, questions that this experimental method enables
researchers to answer. We then review important issues in the data
analysis of microrandomized trials and consider the method’s
potential for supplementing the use of behavioral theory in guiding
intervention design. We end with a discussion of key methodolog-
ical and logistical considerations in designing microrandomized
trials.
Current Methods for Intervention Optimization
There are three main approaches that can be currently used to
optimize JITAIs. As Collins, Murphy, Nair, and Strecher (2005)
note, behavioral interventions have traditionally been optimized
using a series of randomized controlled trials (RCTs). As an
experimental method, RCTs are designed to assess whether, on
average, the intervention package as a whole had an effect on the
behavior of interest. However, RCTs are not designed to investi-
gate which components of an intervention are efficacious, when
they are efficacious, or what psychosocial or contextual factors
influenced their efficacy. In secondary analyses of RCT data,
random assignment facilitates the assessment of treatment-effect
moderation with respect to baseline characteristics (e.g., age),
which provides information about static factors that influence
efficacy of the intervention package (e.g., Hekler et al., 2013).
However, this is insufficient for JITAI development, where we
must evaluate what time-varying factors influence the efficacy of
different components in order to understand when and in what
contexts a particular intervention option should be delivered. If
there is sufficient variability across time in receipt of a component
due to nonadherence or implementation problems (e.g., partici-
pants’ medication adherence goes up and down over time), then
RCT data can be used to investigate time-varying moderation and
effects of time-varying components. However, as is well known, in
such secondary analyses, baseline randomization offers no protec-
tion against causal confounding, and results are subject to bias.
Thus, important questions pertaining to JITAI optimization—
when a particular intervention component should be delivered,
what factors at the time of delivery affect whether the intervention
component will have the desired effect, and so on—are poorly
addressed by data from standard RCTs.
As an alternative to RCTs, there has been a resurgence of
interest in the use of single-case experimental designs (SCEDs) to
develop and evaluate mHealth interventions (Dallery, Cassidy, &
Raiff, 2013; Dallery & Raiff, 2014). SCEDs enable highly efficient
preliminary efficacy testing of an intervention component, since
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
1221
MICRORANDOMIZED TRIALS

each participant acts as his or her own control. However, in their
traditional forms (i.e., reversal, multiple-baseline, and changing-
criterion designs), SCEDs are of little help for determining the
time or context in which a certain intervention option is most
efficacious. This is because SCEDs often do not clearly articulate
decision points for intervention-component delivery or systemati-
cally examine moderators of observed effects.
To overcome the limitations of RCTs in guiding intervention
design, Collins and colleagues (Collins, Chakraborty, Murphy, &
Strecher, 2009; Collins et al., 2005) proposed the use of factorial
experiments as a part of the Multiphase Optimization Strategy
(MOST) for multicomponent interventions. Traditional factorial
designs can be used to assess the effects of each individual inter-
vention component and key interactions of interest, enabling re-
searchers to choose, based on empirical evidence, which interven-
tion components to include in an intervention package and at what
dose. However, traditional factorial designs do not allow the
determination of times when it is most effective to deliver each
intervention option. Nor do these designs allow researchers to
investigate what time-varying factors moderate the relative effect
of different time-varying intervention components. These are key
questions for JITAI development. Microrandomized trials over-
come these limitations of traditional factorial designs, and for
JITAI development, they can be incorporated into MOST as an
alternative experimental design in the early stages of intervention
development.
Microrandomized Trial Design
Microrandomization involves randomly assigning an interven-
tion option at each relevant decision point: a point in time when—
based on theory, participant’s past behavior, and the participant’s
current context—a particular intervention component might be
efficacious. For a typical multicomponent intervention, multiple
components can be randomized concurrently, making microran-
domization a form of a sequential factorial design. Since interven-
tion options are randomly assigned at each decision point, a study
lasting several weeks or several months may randomize each
person hundreds or thousands of times, depending on the fre-
quency at which intervention components being investigated are
delivered.
Microrandomized trials are well-suited for optimizing JITAIs
for two main reasons. First, microrandomized trials enable assess-
ment of the intervention’s time-varying effects. Recall that ran-
domization is used throughout the sciences because, on average,
random assignment produces compositional balance in unobserved
and unknown factors between the treatment conditions. Differ-
ences in outcomes between these conditions can thus be more
confidently attributed to the differing treatments, enabling estima-
tion of the causal effect of the treatment (Shadish, Cook, &
Campbell, 2002). Because the intervention components being in-
vestigated are repeatedly randomized, microrandomized trials al-
low researchers to assess how intervention components’ causal
effects change over the course of the study. And second, micro-
randomized trials are highly efficient. Because each intervention
component is repeatedly randomized for each person, effect esti-
mations can take advantage not only of the contrasts in outcomes
between people assigned to an intervention option and outcomes
among people assigned to a different intervention option (or no
intervention), but also of the contrasts in outcomes between times
when each person is randomized to an intervention option and
times when the same person is randomized to a different interven-
tion option. These within-subject comparisons enable microran-
domized studies to require far fewer participants than traditional
full factorial designs.
An Example of a Microrandomized Trial
To better understand the design and value of microrandomized
trials, consider HeartSteps, an mHealth intervention for physical
activity. HeartSteps consists of a wristband activity tracker that
monitors users’ steps throughout the day and an Android applica-
tion intended to encourage walking. For the purposes of this
discussion, the phone application contains two main intervention
components: (a) daily activity planning and (b) contextually rele-
vant suggestions for physical activity. The daily activity planning
component is based on the concept of implementation intentions
(Gollwitzer, 1999), which involves the formulation of plans that
specify when, where, and how a person will engage in a goal-
advancing behavior. Implementation intentions are thought to au-
tomate action initiation and have been shown to effectively support
engagement in health behaviors even when the person’s self-
regulatory resources are depleted (Sheeran, Gollwitzer, & Bargh,
2013). The contextually relevant suggestions for physical activity
are intended to be actionable in the user’s current situation—time
of day, location, weather, and day of the week—which (we hy-
pothesize) should make them easier to follow. Two types of
suggestions can be sent: suggestions to go for a walk and sugges-
tions to stop being sedentary (e.g., while she is at work, the system
might suggest to a user to walk over to the water cooler to get
hydrated and stretch her legs). When they receive a suggestion,
users can respond to it by pressing the thumbs-up or thumbs-down
buttons to indicate they liked or did not like the suggestion, or by
pressing “snooze” to indicate that they do not want to receive
further suggestions for the next 2, 4, 8, or 12 hr.
To optimize the delivery of daily planning and contextually
relevant activity suggestions, we are conducting a microrandom-
ized trial to evaluate the effects of these two intervention compo-
nents. In our trial, intervention delivery is randomized as follows.
Because the planning component is a daily intervention—in the
evening, individuals plan physical activities they will do the fol-
lowing day—every evening each person is randomized to one of
two options: either prompt the person to plan her physical activity
for the next day or not. We are using 50–50 randomization, which
means that every evening, there is a 50% chance that a participant
will be asked to plan her physical activity for the next day. There
are also two main options for the contextually relevant activity
suggestions: either deliver an activity suggestion or not. Further,
when a person is randomized to receive an activity suggestion, the
system randomizes whether to send her a suggestion to go for a
walk or to move around to stop being sedentary at 50% probability.
The contextually relevant suggestions can be delivered at five time
points during the day—morning commute, lunch time, mid after-
noon, evening commute, and after dinner. These are periods during
which our prior data indicate that people have regular opportuni-
ties to be active and thus are potentially appropriate times to
provide an activity suggestion. This means that a person can
receive up to five contextually relevant activity suggestions in a
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
1222
KLASNJA ET AL.

single day. In our microrandomized trial, whether or not a sug-
gestion will be sent is randomized for each participant at each of
these five time points each day of the study. To reduce participant
burden, we use a slightly unequal randomization, randomizing
suggestion delivery at 40%, meaning that, on average, a person
would receive two activity suggestions per day. Subjects partici-
pate in the trial for 6 weeks (42 days), meaning that the trial will
generate, per person, 42 data points for daily planning and 210 data
points (42  5) for activity suggestions.
Distal, Proximal, and Lagged Outcomes
Microrandomized trials are designed to assess causal effects of
each randomized intervention component. Defining the interven-
tion outcomes is thus a key aspect of the design of a microran-
domized trial. In HeartSteps, the ultimate goal of the intervention
as a whole is to help sedentary individuals work up to and then
maintain recommended levels of moderate-intensity physical
activity—150 min of moderate-intensity activity per week, which
is roughly equivalent to 10,000 steps of walking per day (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2008). This is the
intervention’s desired distal outcome. But distal outcomes are
(presumably) achieved through the accumulation of outcomes
brought about by the repeated delivery of the application’s inter-
vention components. These proximal outcomes are the effects that
the delivery of a particular intervention component is intended to
have, and they often can be seen as mediators of the desired distal
outcome. A first goal of a microrandomized trial is to assess
whether the randomized intervention components are having their
intended proximal outcomes. In the case of HeartSteps, the goal of
activity suggestions is to help people walk right after they receive
a suggestion. Hence, for the activity-suggestion component, a
reasonable proximal outcome for activity suggestions might be the
number of steps taken within 60 min of the suggestion delivery.
For the daily planning component, the proximal outcome is the
daily step count. Analogous to primary outcomes in RCTs, prox-
imal outcomes may be assessed in the primary analysis of micro-
randomized trial data, while enabling other analyses.
Note that for both activity suggestions and daily planning, the
proximal outcomes are just shorter-time-scale versions of the distal
outcomes—in all three cases, the outcomes are steps. This is not
always the case. In many interventions, proximal outcomes may be
different from distal outcomes; here the proximal outcome might
be a mediator. In a relapse-prevention intervention for substance
abuse, for example, an intervention component might target social
support, which has been shown to be a factor in people’s ability to
abstain from drug use (Havassy, Hall, & Wasserman, 1991). The
proximal outcome of such a component might be the number of
daily interactions with abstinence-supporting friends and family
members. A microrandomized trial might focus on assessing
whether the social-support intervention component is increasing
these interactions while also addressing presumed mediating pro-
cesses by examining if increased social interactions are subse-
quently associated with a reduced probability of relapse.
A microrandomized trial can investigate not only proximal but
also lagged effects. Lagged effects may arise in various ways. For
instance, a user of HeartSteps might receive a lunch-time sugges-
tion to walk to a salad place a few blocks from the office, so she
can get a healthy lunch and walk 1,000 steps at the same time. The
user might not follow the suggestion at the time she received it, but
the next day she might remember the suggestion and go to the
salad bar even though she did not receive another lunch-time
suggestion. An understanding of such lagged effects is critical to
developing low-burden JITAIs because they may pinpoint user
characteristics or contexts for which the frequency of intervention
delivery can be scaled back while maintaining desired effects on
the target behavior.
Randomization and Participant Availability
The core concept behind microrandomized trials involves ran-
domizing the options for a particular intervention component each
time that intervention component may be delivered. For Heart-
Steps’ daily planning component, which asks participants to plan
their activity for the next day, it is feasible and appropriate to
deliver the planning activity on any evening. Thus, daily activity
planning may be randomized each evening. Sometimes, however,
it may be inappropriate to deliver an intervention. For HeartSteps’
activity suggestions, we do not want to deliver a suggestion if a
participant is already walking or, as a safety precaution, while she
is driving (HeartSteps can determine the participant’s current ac-
tivity using Android’s built-in activity recognition). When the
intervention is not feasible or appropriate at a decision point, we
consider the individual unavailable to receive the intervention. In
such cases, randomized intervention-component delivery takes
place only when the participant is available for the intervention.
During unavailable times (e.g., when the person is driving a car),
these intervention components would never be delivered, and the
data for those decision points would include an “unavailable”
indicator. As we discuss in the section on data analysis, keeping
track of participant availability is important because effect estima-
tions have to take availability into account.
Research Questions for Microrandomized Trials
We can now be more specific about the research questions that
microrandomized trials can address. A microrandomized trial can
help researchers answer the following questions:
•
What are the proximal and lagged effects of an interven-
tion component?
•
How do the proximal and lagged effects of an intervention
component change over time?
•
Which factors (time-invariant or time-varying) moderate
an intervention component’s proximal or lagged effects?
Table 1 lists some of the research questions—concrete instan-
tiations of the general research questions we outlined above—that
we are investigating in our 6-week microrandomized trial of Heart-
Steps. Answers to such questions will help us assess whether the
activity suggestions in HeartSteps are working as intended (i.e., if
they help individuals to get steps at different times of the day) and
determine the contexts in which HeartSteps should send sugges-
tions to maximize efficacy. Knowing how suggestions affect ac-
tivity and user burden, and how participants respond to them by
way of changing their walking behavior based on the context of
delivery (e.g., the time of the day, location, etc.), would help us
formulate decision rules for a revised version of HeartSteps that
would deliver relevant types of suggestions at the times and
frequencies that maximize their impact on users’ walking and
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
1223
MICRORANDOMIZED TRIALS

minimize impact on perceived burden. It is such optimizations of
JITAIs that microrandomized trials are designed to support.
Data-Analytic Issues in Microrandomized Trials
Microrandomized trials generate intensive longitudinal data
akin to data from observational EMA studies that repeatedly
measure participants’ behaviors, context, and psychosocial factors.
As such, many of the modeling approaches used to analyze inten-
sive longitudinal data, such as multilevel models (MLM) and the
generalized estimating equation (GEE; e.g., Bolger & Laurenceau,
2013; Walls & Schafer, 2006) can also be used in microrandom-
ized trials to assess overall treatment effects and factors that might
moderate those effects.
In the following sections, we outline an analytical approach for
estimating proximal effects and effect moderation from microran-
domized trial data and discuss related data-analytic issues such as
bias and participant availability. To illustrate the approach, we use
the example of HeartSteps.
Analyses for Assessing Proximal Effects
Because microrandomized trials are sequential factorial de-
signs, primary analyses will often focus on detecting minimum
clinically significant differences in the proximal main effects
(see Liao, Klasnja, Tewari, & Murphy, 2015, which includes
sample size calculations for such primary analyses). Recall that
a main effect for a component in a factorial design is an average
effect across the effects of the other components and the inter-
actions with the other components. The primary analyses for
microrandomized trials—analyses for which ideally the trials
should be powered—assess the main effect, that is, whether
each randomized intervention component is showing its in-
tended proximal effect.
Proximal effects can be estimated using standard MLM or
GEE regression models. Assume that we want to assess whether
HeartSteps’ evening planning activity increases the next day’s
step count. Here, a standard MLM with an intercept and a term
for evening planning can be used to estimate the proximal
effect. In this model, the estimate of the coefficient for evening
planning represents the mean difference in daily step count
between person days that follow the planning activity and
person days when planning did not occur the previous evening,
averaged across all days of the study. This model could be
easily expanded to examine whether the effect of planning
varies as a function of time by including a model for time (e.g.,
linear, quadratic, or something more flexible) in the equation.
In this case, the time-varying effect of planning will be repre-
sented by the coefficients of the interactions between the term
for planning and the terms representing the time function (e.g.,
quadratic).
Finally, as is usual in MLMs, baseline and time-varying cova-
riates that are thought to be related to the daily step count can also
be included in the model to improve power. To minimize biasing
effect estimates, however, one should only include covariates in
the model that are not affected by the intervention (Barber, Mur-
phy, & Verbitsky, 2004). For example, if one wanted to include a
measure of time-varying user burden as a covariate, one would
only include reported burden measured on the previous day in the
model. This is because burden report for the current day could be
affected by whether a participant was asked to do a planning
activity the prior evening. Covariates unaffected by the interven-
tion can be freely included, however. For example, one could
include weather in the model since weather is not affected by
participant’s planning. Similarly, participant characteristics, such
as gender or age, can also be included without biasing the effect
estimates.
To illustrate this discussion, equations below provide a simple
model for estimating the time-varying effect of evening planning
on day t on the next day’s step count. For simplicity, the model
includes only one contextual covariate, weather. We use the fol-
lowing notation: Yit denotes the ith participant’s proximal out-
come, in this case the next day’s step count; Ait denotes the
intervention option, which is 1 if evening planning occurred on day
t and 0 if it did not; Wit denotes weather, which is 1 for good
weather and 0 for bad weather (rain or too cold or too hot to walk
outside); and Bi denotes the ith participant’s baseline average daily
Table 1
Example Research Questions About Contextually Relevant Activity Suggestions That Can Be Answered Through the 6-Week
Microrandomized Trial of HeartSteps
Research questions about main effects of contextually relevant activity suggestions
By how much, on average, does providing an activity suggestion increase the step count over the next 60 min relative to no activity suggestion?
By how much, on average, does providing a suggestion to get up and move around increase the step count over the next 60 min relative to a
suggestion to take a walk?
How does the effect of an activity suggestion on the step count in the next 60 min change over the course of a 6-week study?
By how much, on average, does providing an activity suggestion change the step count for the remaining part of the same day? On the next day?
How does the number of availability-appropriate activity suggestions delivered in a day impact daily self-report of user burden?
Research questions about moderators of effects of activity suggestions
How does the time of day, the user’s location, outside temperature, and the state of the user’s calendar (free/busy) influence an activity suggestions’
effect on the next 60-min step count?
How do these contextual factors affect whether the user perceives a suggestion as helpful, based on the way the user acknowledged the suggestion
notification on her phone?
How does the user’s baseline level of physical activity influence the effect of suggesting activity on the next 60-min step count?
How does the user’s location and time of day influence efficacy of suggestions targeting disruption of sedentary behavior vs. going for a walk?
How does the influence of these contextual factors on the effect of activity suggestions change over the course of the 6-week study?
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
1224
KLASNJA ET AL.

step count. This simple model uses a quadratic function for day to
model a time-varying effect of evening planning.
Level 1: Proximal step count is modeled by time, interven-
tion, and weather.1
Yit  0i  1it  2it2  3iWit  4iAit  5iAitt  6iAitt2
 εit, t  1, . . . , 42
(1)
Level 2: Participant differences are modeled by baseline step
count.2
ki  k0  k1Bi  ki, k  1, . . . , 6
(2)
Participant availability.
Effect estimations for intervention
components that depend on participant availability require a more
nuanced concept of the proximal main effect. Here, the proximal
main effect of an intervention component is conceptualized as the
difference in the proximal outcome between when the treatment is
delivered versus when the treatment is not delivered, but only
among individuals who are available for treatment at each decision
point. For such intervention components, each data row should
include an availability indicator, which is 1 if the participant is
available for treatment at that decision point and 0 otherwise. A
model to estimate the effect of an intervention component that
depends on participant availability should only include the term for
the proximal effect in interaction with the availability indicator and
never by itself. In a correctly specified model that includes the
main effect for availability and all relevant covariates, the estimate
of the coefficient of the interaction between the terms for the
intervention action and the availability indicator would then rep-
resent the average proximal main effect of the intervention com-
ponent among available occasions.
Note, though, that for some intervention components, the pop-
ulation of available individuals will likely substantially change
over the course of the trial. For example, in HeartSteps, individuals
for whom the intervention is working might increasingly be walk-
ing at decision times for activity suggestions. Similarly, partici-
pants who find the intervention annoying might repeatedly snooze
the system and would rarely be available to receive a suggestion.
For intervention components for which available population is
likely to shift over the course of the trial, the proximal effect
should be estimated as a time-varying effect; at each time point,
the estimated effect then represents the intervention effect on the
subpopulation of currently available individuals.
As a secondary analysis, microrandomized trial data can be used
to examine predictors of change in availability by modeling the
availability indicator as an outcome. This enables researchers to
interpret for whom the effect of the intervention component is
being estimated at different times over the course of the trial.
Analyses of Time-Varying Moderation
In addition to estimating proximal main effects, analyses of
microrandomized-trial data are also able to assess how other
time-varying factors—contextual and psychosocial factors such as
participants’ location, stress level, or annoyance with the interven-
tion—moderate proximal effects of intervention components over
time. For mHealth interventions, such questions about time-
varying moderation are particularly important because the same
individual can receive an intervention in many different contexts.
Knowing how the user’s context at decision time moderates the
effect of an intervention component can help the researchers create
decision rules that maximize the likelihood that individuals will
be receptive to the intervention when it is delivered and minimize
the chances of increasing user burden.
As with main effects, treatment-effect moderation can be as-
sessed using MLM and GEE regression approaches by estimating
the coefficients of the interactions of the terms for randomized
intervention components and for the time-varying moderators of
interest. Consider, for instance, assessing how weather influences
the effect of the prior evening’s planning on the daily step count.
In a correctly specified model, the coefficients for the three-way
interactions involving the terms for weather, evening planning, and
the function for time would estimate how the dampening influence
of bad weather on the effect of daily planning on the next day’s
step count changes over the course of the study.
Power
While a detailed discussion of sample size calculations for
microrandomized trials is beyond the scope of this paper, primary
analyses can be conservatively powered using regression-based
techniques such as GEE. Our preliminary power calculations show
that microrandomized trials are highly efficient (Liao et al., 2015).
For HeartSteps activity suggestions, we make the conservative
assumptions that the proximal main effect on the first study day is
0, that the maximum proximal main effect will be seen half-way
through the study, and that participants will be available for an
activity suggestion only 50% of the time. Our calculations show
that a 6-week study would be able to detect a standardized prox-
imal effect of 0.10 (small by Cohen’s (1992) standards), with a
type-I error rate of   .05 and 80% power using only 43
participants. If we instead assume that participants would be avail-
able for a suggestion 70% of the time, the needed sample size goes
down further, to 33 participants. The high efficiency of microran-
domized trials is to a great extent due to their ability to take
advantage of both between-subjects and within-subject contrasts in
the proximal outcome.
Microrandomized Trials and Theoretical Grounding
of JITAI Design
At their best, JITAIs consist of intervention components that
embody behavior-change techniques derived from our best behav-
ioral theories (Michie et al., 2011). But while theory has been
immensely helpful in guiding the design of intervention compo-
nents themselves, it has been limited in its ability to guide other
1 The level 1 residuals, εti, are usually assumed to be independent,
normally distributed with mean zero and constant variance, 2, and uncor-
related with
Wit, Ait, Bi, i  1, . . . , n; t  1, . . . , 42.
2 The level 2 residuals, i, i  1, . . ., n, are usually assumed to be
multivariate normal with mean zero, and uncorrelated with
εit, Wit, Ait, Bi, i  1, . . . , n; t  1, . . . , 42.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
1225
MICRORANDOMIZED TRIALS

aspects of JITAI design. The problem is twofold. First, we cur-
rently do not have a mature body of knowledge about how to
translate
abstract
theoretical
constructs
into
technological
behavior-change intervention components. A growing literature in
human-computer interaction has shown that implementation de-
tails matter, and that decisions such as the location of self-
monitoring feedback (e.g., presented within the application vs. on
the phone’s lock screen) or the form of the reward for goal-
attainment (e.g., trophies vs. points) substantially impact user
experience of an intervention and, in turn, its ability to support
behavior change (Consolvo, Klasnja, McDonald, & Landay,
2014). Decisions about how to implement particular behavior-
change techniques in a JITAI are thus often left to researchers’
judgment, or they evolve through an iterative design process.
Second, behavioral theories in their current form are often not
granular enough to guide the design of decision rules for the
delivery of intervention components (Riley et al., 2011; Spruijt-
Metz & Nilsen, 2014). Even for theories with dynamic constructs
(e.g., Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2004), the current evidence base—
often derived from studies that used temporally sparse data—lacks
sufficient information about the optimal timing of intervention
delivery. For example, how soon should a physical-activity goal be
decreased if a participant starts to repeatedly miss the current goal?
In what circumstances should individuals be asked to create im-
plementation intentions for frequent behaviors like healthy eating?
We suggest that microrandomized trials can help build the
knowledge base in both of these areas by gathering empirical
evidence for principled JITAI design and evidence about the
dynamics of interactions among intervention components, psycho-
social processes, and contextual variables needed to refine and
extend current behavioral theories.
An important role microrandomized trials can play in advancing
the science of design of behavior-change technologies is in com-
paring different implementations of a behavior-change technique.
For example, one might microrandomize different ways of provid-
ing feedback about the cigarettes that participants smoked and
resisted each day, by varying, for instance, the amount of infor-
mation provided in the representation or how the feedback is
framed. By gathering data about the various outcomes that such
feedback is intended to have—for example, increasing self-
efficacy for quitting, improving participants’ awareness of the
contexts in which they are most likely to smoke, and the number
of cigarettes smoked the following day—such studies could begin
to build an evidence base about the comparative efficacy and
tradeoffs of various implementations of a behavior-change tech-
nique for different health behaviors, populations, and contexts.
Findings from such studies could supplement the current taxono-
mies in guiding the translation of behavioral theories into concrete
interventions.
With regard to theory, microrandomized trials could help gather
the evidence to elucidate the dynamic aspects of behavior-change
processes needed to guide the design of decision rules for inter-
vention delivery. For example, a microrandomized trial could
explore how planning interacts with self-efficacy and daily rou-
tines to shape health behaviors. Such a trial might randomize
whether participants plan how they will eat healthily the following
day, and would measure each day self-efficacy for healthy eating,
how healthily participants ate that day, and the busyness of par-
ticipants’ calendars. Such a trial could investigate whether plan-
ning increases healthy eating only when self-efficacy is low or
whether it tends to be more helpful when participants’ are unusu-
ally busy or traveling. Just as importantly, such a trial would
uncover whether these relationships change over time, as partici-
pants start habituating to the planning activity or their eating
patterns become more routinized. Results of such studies would
help researchers better understand the dynamics of psychosocial
processes such as planning, while also enabling more principled
design of decision rules for interventions based on those processes.
Which constructs and processes such trials should investigate will
be determined by the researchers’ understanding of the aspects of
the current theories that need further elucidation. But insofar as
theoretical constructs of interests can be measured repeatedly in a
low-burden way, and can be affected through push intervention
components, microrandomized trails can help elucidate their tem-
poral dynamics.
Implementation Considerations for
Microrandomized Trials
There are several important practical considerations that go into
the design of microrandomized trials, such as decisions about
intervention components that are randomized and the selection of
proximal outcomes. We discuss these implementation issues next.
Deciding Which Components to Randomize
and How
A key consideration in the design of a microrandomized trial is
the decision regarding which intervention components and options
to randomize. This choice should be governed by a combination of
scientific, design, and usability considerations. In general, one
would randomize intervention components for which there is in-
sufficient scientific evidence for their effect on the proximal out-
come (e.g., contextual activity suggestions in HeartSteps), or for
which we do not sufficiently understand the dynamics of their
operation over time (e.g., HeartSteps’ daily planning activities). In
both of these cases, a microrandomized trial would yield scientific
knowledge about new intervention strategies and the psychosocial
processes embodied in these strategies. Another reason to micro-
randomize an intervention component is to guide selection among
several implementations of an intervention strategy, such as dif-
ferent realizations of daily goal-setting or representations of goal-
attainment rewards. In this case, a microrandomized trial would
take place at an early stage of intervention development to inform
the design of the components that researchers are considering for
the inclusion in the intervention. Finally, one could randomize
among different types of interventions that can be delivered at the
same decision points, such as different coping strategies for drug-
use cravings. Here, a microrandomized trial would reveal for
whom and in what circumstances each type of intervention strat-
egy is most likely to be efficacious.
Another consideration is the randomization rate for different
intervention components. While a 50–50 randomization provides
most power, there are cases where a different randomization rate
might make sense. One such scenario is when the researcher wants
to concurrently determine whether an intervention strategy is ef-
ficacious and which version of that strategy works best. In this
case, it can make sense to randomize nondelivery and overall
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
1226
KLASNJA ET AL.

delivery of the intervention component at 50–50 to maximize the
likelihood that an effect can be detected, and then break down the
50% delivery portion among different versions of the intervention
strategy (e.g., randomize version 1 and version 2 at 25% each).
Another scenario when a skewed randomization ratio can be useful
is when the intervention component is highly burdensome. Reduc-
ing the rate from 50–50 to a lower percentage for intervention
delivery, as we have done for activity suggestions in HeartSteps,
can help gather data about the effects of the intervention while
minimizing the risk that participants will frequently decline the
intervention or abandon the system altogether due to excessive
burden.
Defining Proximal Outcomes
Another key consideration involves defining proximal outcomes
for randomized intervention components. For some components,
proximal outcomes can be relatively clear and easily measurable.
For instance, for a goal-setting component of a walking interven-
tion, the attainment of the daily step goal is an obvious proximal
outcome. For other components, no such unambiguous proximal
outcomes present themselves. For example, what is the right
proximal outcome for the HeartSteps’ contextual activity sugges-
tions? Is it whether or not the specific activity contained in the
message was followed as suggested? Is it the absolute step count
for a period after the suggestion was delivered? If so, over what
period? 10 min? 30 min? An hour? Is it the change in the step
count for a period following the suggestion over the step count for
an equally long period prior to the suggestion? A case could be
made for any of these outcomes and others in turn. When no
obvious proximal outcome exists, researchers need to make a
decision based on their judgment and logistical considerations
(e.g., technical feasibility or burden of measuring a particular type
of outcome). For HeartSteps’ activity suggestions, the only way to
accurately tell whether the person followed the actual suggestion
that was sent to her would be to ask. This would not only introduce
additional burden but also act as an intervention in its own right,
confounding the effects of the suggestions themselves. For these
reasons, we opted for a less direct outcome (step count over the
next hour) that can be assessed passively. In addition, our chosen
outcome allows the intervention to get credit for activity that might
be different from the activity suggested.
When the chosen proximal outcome is not a shorter-time-scale
version of the distal outcome—for example, when a component of
a smoking intervention targets stress reduction and not actual
smoking—that choice rests on a theory of mediation (i.e., that
individuals smoke to reduce stress), which must be tested or
theoretically justified. The data collected in a microrandomized
trial allows for testing of such mediational relationships.
Limitations
Although they are a powerful way of optimizing JITAIs, micro-
randomized trials have several limitations. There are three require-
ments for the use of microrandomized trials for intervention opti-
mization. First, these trials are only applicable for testing of push
interventions—interventions such as reminders or prompts to set
goals that are delivered to individuals based on a set of decision
rules. Microrandomized trials are not suitable for testing of inter-
vention components that are made available to individuals but
which individuals access at will. If a researcher wants to micro-
randomize a pull intervention component (e.g., graphs for provid-
ing feedback on a health behavior), that component first needs to
be converted into a push intervention (e.g., a notification to access
the graphs). Given that push interventions can be burdensome,
however, microrandomization will be typically limited to a subset
of components of an mHealth intervention. Second, given that the
analyses of microrandomized trial data focus on proximal out-
comes, microrandomized trials are most appropriate for testing of
intervention components for which proximal outcomes can be
defined in a principled way (i.e., theory-based components for
which theory specifies the outcomes that the components will
directly impact) and for which the proximal outcomes can be
measured in a low-burden way (passively or through brief self-
report) so that they can be assessed each time the intervention is
randomized. Finally, as a within-subject design, microrandomized
trials are not suitable for testing of interventions for very rare
events, such as interventions for prevention of manic episodes in
the bipolar disorder, which would be experienced by few people
during a study and seldom experienced repeatedly by any one
person over the course of the trial. Interventions for such rare
events should be optimized through traditional cross-sectional
designs.
Conclusion
JITAIs have the potential to greatly enhance how we support
people’s efforts to adopt and sustain healthy behaviors. The de-
velopment of effective JITAIs has been stymied, however, by a
lack of appropriate optimization methods. Microrandomized trials
have the potential to address this limitation, enabling the creation
of interventions that can effectively support individuals whenever
and wherever they most need the support.
References
Barber, J. S., Murphy, S. A., & Verbitsky, N. (2004). Adjusting for
time-varying confounding in survival analysis. Sociological Methodol-
ogy, 34, 163–192. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.0081-1750.2004.00151.x
Bolger, N., & Laurenceau, J.-P. (2013). Intensive longitudinal methods: An
introduction to diary and experience sampling research. New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 155–159.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.112.1.155
Collins, L. M., Chakraborty, B., Murphy, S. A., & Strecher, V. (2009).
Comparison of a phased experimental approach and a single randomized
clinical trial for developing multicomponent behavioral interventions.
Clinical Trials, 6, 5–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1740774508100973
Collins, L. M., Murphy, S. A., Nair, V. N., & Strecher, V. J. (2005). A
strategy for optimizing and evaluating behavioral interventions. Annals
of Behavioral Medicine, 30, 65–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/
s15324796abm3001_8
Consolvo, S., Klasnja, P., McDonald, D. W., & Landay, J. A. (2014).
Designing for healthy lifestyles: Design considerations for mobile tech-
nologies to encourage consumer health & wellness. Foundations and
Trends in Human-Computer Interaction, 6, 167–315.
Dallery, J., Cassidy, R. N., & Raiff, B. R. (2013). Single-case experimental
designs to evaluate novel technology-based health interventions. Journal
of Medical Internet Research, 15, e22. http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/jmir
.2227
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
1227
MICRORANDOMIZED TRIALS

Dallery, J., & Raiff, B. R. (2014). Optimizing behavioral health interven-
tions with single-case designs: From development to dissemination.
Translational Behavioral Medicine, 4, 290–303. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1007/s13142-014-0258-z
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong effects of
simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493–503. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/0003-066X.54.7.493
Havassy, B. E., Hall, S. M., & Wasserman, D. A. (1991). Social support
and relapse: Commonalities among alcoholics, opiate users, and ciga-
rette smokers. Addictive Behaviors, 16, 235–246. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1016/0306-4603(91)90016-B
Hekler, E. B., Buman, M. P., Otten, J., Castro, C. M., Grieco, L., Marcus,
B., . . . King, A. C. (2013). Determining who responds better to a
computer- vs. human-delivered physical activity intervention: Results
from the community health advice by telephone (CHAT) trial. The
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 10,
109. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1479-5868-10-109
Hekler, E. B., Klasnja, P., Traver, V., & Hendriks, M. (2013). Realizing
effective behavioral management of health: The metamorphosis of be-
havioral science methods. IEEE Pulse, 4, 29–34. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1109/MPUL.2013.2271681
Intille, S. S. (2004). Ubiquitous computing technology for just-in-time
motivation of behavior change. Studies in Health Technology and In-
formatics, 107, 1434–1437.
Kumar, S., Nilsen, W. J., Abernethy, A., Atienza, A., Patrick, K., Pavel,
M., . . . Swendeman, D. (2013). Mobile health technology evaluation:
The mHealth evidence workshop. American Journal of Preventive Med-
icine, 45, 228–236. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2013.03.017
Liao, P., Klasnja, P., Tewari, A., & Murphy, S. A. (2015). Micro-
randomized trials in mhealth (University of Michigan Tech. Rep. No.
537). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Michie, S., Ashford, S., Sniehotta, F. F., Dombrowski, S. U., Bishop, A.,
& French, D. P. (2011). A refined taxonomy of behaviour change
techniques to help people change their physical activity and healthy
eating behaviours: The CALO-RE taxonomy. Psychology & Health, 26,
1479–1498. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2010.540664
Nahum-Shani, I., Hekler, E. B., & Spruijt-Metz, D. (2015). Building health
behavior models to guide the development of just-in-time adaptive
interventions: A pragmatic framework. Health Psychology, 34(Suppl),
1209–1219. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000306
Patrick, K., Griswold, W. G., Raab, F., & Intille, S. S. (2008). Health and
the mobile phone. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35, 177–
181. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.05.001
Riley, W. T., Rivera, D. E., Atienza, A. A., Nilsen, W., Allison, S. M., &
Mermelstein, R. (2011). Health behavior models in the age of mobile
interventions: Are our theories up to the task? Translational Behavioral
Medicine, 1, 53–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13142-011-0021-7
Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002). Experimental and
quasi-experimental designs for generalized causal inference. New York,
NY: Wadsworth Cengage learning.
Sheeran, P., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2013). Nonconscious
processes and health. Health Psychology, 32, 460–473. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1037/a0029203
Spruijt-Metz, D., & Nilsen, W. (2014). Dynamic models of behavior for
just-in-time adaptive interventions. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 13,
13–17. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2014.46
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2008). 2008 physical
activity guidelines for Americans. Washington, DC: Author.
Walls, T. A., & Schafer, J. L. (Eds.). (2006). Models for intensive longi-
tudinal data. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195173444.001.0001
Witkiewitz, K., & Marlatt, G. A. (2004). Relapse prevention for alcohol
and drug problems: That was Zen, this is Tao. American Psychologist,
59, 224–235. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.59.4.224
Received January 29, 2015
Revision received June 24, 2015
Accepted September 4, 2015 
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
1228
KLASNJA ET AL.
