A1-01 verified body passages (archive scan): PDF pages 25-50 ~ print pp.18-43.
Contains: Heidegger-impasse argument (Introduction), §1 The Becoming of Prometheus, §2 Cosmos Cosmology and Cosmotechnics (incl. cosmotechnics definition and Leroi-Gourhan/Gille critiques).

6 
If communism in China should come to rule, then one can
assume that only in this way does China become ‘free’ for tech- 
6 
nology. What is this process?6
f­o 
=>
§ 
What does becoming 'free' for technology mean here, if not
z 
to fall prey to an inability to reflect upon it and to transform
it? And indeed, a lack o f reflection upon the question of 
technology in the East has prevented the emergence of any 
genuine critique originating from its own cultures: something 
truly symptomatic o f a detachment between thinking and 
technology similar to that which Heidegger described during 
the 19L10 S in Europe. And yet if China, in addressing this ques­
tion. relies on Heidegger's fundamentally Occidental analysis 
o f the history of technics, we will reach an impasse— and 
this, unfortunately, is where we stand today. So what is the 
question concerning technology fo r non-European cultures 
prior to modernization? Is it the same question as that of the 
West prior to modernization, the question of Greek techne? 
Furthermore, if Heidegger was able to retrieve the question 
of Being from the Seinsvergessenheit of Western metaphys­
ics, and if today Bernard Stiegler can retrieve the question 
of time from the long oubli de la technique in Western phi­
losophy, w hat m ight Non-Europeans aspire to? If these ques­
tions are not even posed, then Philosophy o f Technology 
in China will continue to be entirely dependent upon the 
work of German philosophers such as Heidegger, Ernst Kapp, 
Friedrich Dessauer, Herbert Marcuse, and Jurgen Habermas, 
American thinkers such as Carl Mitcham, Don Ihde, and Albert
6. 
'Wenn der Kommunismus in China an die Herrschaft kommen sollte, 
steht zu vermuten, da8 erst auf diesem Wege China fur die Technik》frei《 
wird. Was liegt in diesem Vorgang?’ Ibid., 441.
巳orgmann, and French thinkers such as Jacques Ellul, Gilbert 
Simondon, and Bernard Stiegler. It seems incapable of moving 
forward-
or even backward.
I believe th a t there is an urgent need to envision and 
develop a philosophy o f technology in China, for both histori­
cal and political reasons. China has modernised itself over the 
past century in order to 'catch up w ith the UK and outstrip the 
U S '(超英趕美，a slogan proposed by Mao Zedong in 1957); 
now it seems to be at a turning point, its modernisation having 
reached a level that allows China to situate itself among the 
great powers. But at the same time, there is a general sentiment 
that China cannot continue with this blind modernisation. The 
great acceleration that has taken place in recent decades has 
also led to various form s of destruction, cultural, environmental, 
social, and political. We are now, so geologists tell us, living 
in a new epoch-
that o f the Anthropocene-
which began 
roughly i nthe eighteenth century with the Industrial Revolution. 
Surviving the Anthropocene will demand reflection upon— and 
transformation of— the practices inherited from the modern, in 
order to overcome modernity i tself. The reconstruction of the 
question of technology in China outlined here also pertains to 
this task, aiming to unfold the concept of technics in its plural­
ity, and to act as an antidote to the modernisation programme 
by reopening a truly global history of the world. The book is 
an attem pt both to respond to Heidegger's concept of tech­
nics, and to sketch out a possible way to construct a properly 
Chinese philosophy of technology.
§1. THE BECOMING OF PROMETHEUS
Is there technological thought in China? At first glance, this 
is a question that can be easily dismissed, fo r what culture 
doesn't have technics? Certainly, technics has existed in China
7
 
T
H
m
g
m
c
o
^
I
N
G
 
O
F
T>
刀
OIV1ETHEUS
o0:
a.
LL
o
(!)z
o
for many centuries, if we understand the concept to denote 
skills for making artificial products. But responding to this 
question more fully will require a deeper appreciation o f what 
is at stake in the question o f technics.
In the evolution of human as homo faber, the moment of 
the liberation of the hands also marks the beginning of sys­
tematic and transmissible practices of making. They emerge 
firstly from the need fo r survival, to make fire, to hunt. to build 
dwellings; later, as certain skills are gradually mastered so as 
to improve living conditions, more sophisticated technics can 
be developed. As French anthropologist and palaeontolo­
gist Andre Leroi-Gourhan has argued, at the moment o f the 
liberation o f the hands. a long history o f evolution opened up, 
by way o f the exteriorisation o f organs and memory and the 
interiorisation o f prostheses.7 Now, within this universal techni­
cal tendency, we observe a diversification o f artefacts across 
different cultures. This diversification is caused by cultural 
specificities. butalso reinforces them, in a kindof feedback loop. 
Leroi-Gourhan calls these specificities 'technical facts’.8 While a 
technical tendency is necessary, technical facts are accidental: 
as Leroi-Gourhan writes. they result from the ‘ encounter of the 
tendency and thousandsof coincidences of the m ilieu? while 
the invention of the wheel is a technical tendency, whether 
or not wheels will have spokes is a m atter of technical fact. 
The early days of the science of making are dominated by the 
technical tendency, meaning that what reveals itself i n human
8
7. 
A. Lero卜Gourhan, Gesture and Speech (Cambridge, MA and London: 
MIT Press, 1993).
8. 
A. Le「oi-Gou「han, Milieu et Technique (Paris: Albin Michel, 1973), 336­
40; L'homme et la Matiere (Paris: Albin Michel, 1973), 27-35.
9. Le「oi-Gou「han, L'homme et la matiere, 27.
activities-
for example in the invention of primitive wheels 
g
and the use o f flint— are optima丨
 natural efficiencies. It i s only 
—
later on that cultural specificities or technical facts begin to 
I
impose themselves more distinctly.10 
al
o
Leroi-Gourhan’s distinction between technical tendency 
0
and technical fact thus seeks to provide an explanation for the 
|
similarities and differences between technical inventions across 
0
different cultures. It sets out from a universal understanding of 
0
the process of hominisation characterised by the technical ten-
~ i
dency o f invention, as we丨
丨
 as the extension o f human organs 
S
c
through technical apparatuses. But how effective is this model 
Ul
in explaining the diversification of technologies throughout the 
world, and the different pace at which invention proceeds in 
different cultures? It i s in 丨
ig h to f these questions that 丨
 hope 
to bring into the discussion the dimensions of cosmology and 
metaphysics, which Leroi-Gourhan himself rarely discussed.
Here is my hypothesis, one which may appear rather 
surprising to some readers: in China. technics in the sense we 
understand it today— or at feast as it is defined by certain 
European philosophers-
never existed. There is a genera丨
 
misconception that all technics are equal, that all skills and 
artificial products coming from all cultures can be reduced to 
one thing called 'technology’. And indeed, it is almost impos­
sible to deny that technics can be understood as the exten­
sion o f the body or the exteriorisation of memory. Yet they 
may not be perceived or reflected upon in the same way in 
different cultures.
To put it differently, technics as a general human activity 
has been present on earth since the time of the Australan- 
thropos; but the philosophical concept of technics cannot
10. 
Ibid.
oa:0.
z
o
LU
工
assumed to be universal. The technics we refer to here is one 
that is the subject of philosophy, meaning that it is rendered 
visible through the birth of philosophy. Understood as such, 
as a philosophical category, technics is also subject to the 
history of philosophy, and is defined by particular interrogative 
perspectives. What we mean by 'philosophy o f technology’ in 
this book is not exactly what in Germany is known as Tech- 
nikphiiosophie, associated with figures such as Ernst Kapp and 
Friedrich Dessauer. Rather, it appears w ith the birth of Hellenic 
philosophy, and constitutes one of philosophy’s core inquiries. 
And technics thus understood, as an ontological category,丨
 will 
argue. must be interrogated in relation to a larger configuration, 
a 'cosmology’ proper to the culture from which it emerged.
We know that the birth of philosophy in ancient Greece, 
as exhibited in the thinking of Thales and Anaximander, was 
a process o f rationalisation, marking a gradual separation 
between m yth and philosophy. Mythology is the source and the 
essential component of European philosophy, which distanced 
itself from mythology by naturalizing the divine and integrating 
it as a supplement to rationality. A rationalist may well argue that 
any recourse to mythology is a 「egression, and that philosophy 
has been able to completely free itself from its mythological 
origins. Yet 丨
 doubt that such a philosophy exists, or ever will. 
We know th a t this opposition between mythos and logos was 
explicit in the Athenian Academy: Aristotle was very critical 
of the 'theologians’ of the school of Hesiod, and Plato before 
him argued relentlessly against myth. Through the mouth of 
Socrates in the Phaedo (61a), he says that mythos is not his 
concern but rather the affair o f the poets (portrayed as liars 
in the Republic). And yet, as Jean-Pierre Vernant has clearly 
shown, Plato 'grants an important place in his writings to myth
10
LLo
CD
as a means o f expressing both those things that lie beyond 
11
and those that fa丨
丨
 short of strictly philosophical language’.11 
—
Philosophy is not the language of blind causa丨
 necessity, but 
rather that which at once allows the latter to be spoken, and 
m
o
goes beyond it. The dialectical movement between rational- 
0
ity and m yth constitutes the dynamic o f philosophy, w ithout 
|
which there would be only positive sciences. The Romantics 
and German Idealists, writing toward the end of the eighteenth 
0
century, were aware of this problematic relationship between 
philosophy and myth. Thus we read in ‘The Oldest System - 
S
c
Programme o f German 丨
dealism’— published anonymously in 
1797, but whose authors are suspected to be, or at 丨
east to 
be associated with, the three friends from the Tubingen Stift. 
Holderlin, Hegel, and Schelling— that 'mythology must become 
philosophical, and the people rational, and philosophy must 
become mythological in order to make philosophers sensuous.
Then eternal unity reigns among u s ^ Not coincidentally, this 
insight came at a moment o f renewal of philosophical interest 
h Greek tragedy, chiefly through the works of these three 
highly influential friends. The implication here is that, in Europe, 
philosophy’s attem pt to separate itself from mythology is 
precisely conditioned by mythology, meaning that mythology 
reveals the germinal form of such a mode of philosophising.
Every demythologisation is accompanied by a remythologisa- 
tion, since philosophy is conditioned by an origin from which it 
can never fully detach itself. Accordingly, in order to interrogate 
what is at stake in the question of technology, we should turn to
11. 
J.P. Vernant. Myth and Society in Ancient Greece, tr. J. Lloyd (New York: 
Zone Books. 1990). 210-11.
12. 
‘The "Oldest System-Programme of German Idealism”’，tr. E. Forster,
European Journal of Philosophy 3 (1995). 199-200.
UJ
工
1-UJ
o0:
(L
the predominant myths of the origins of technology that have 
been handed down to us, and at once rejected and extended by 
Western philosophy. The misconception that technics can be 
considered as some kind of universal remains a huge obstacle 
to understanding the global technological condition in general, 
and in particular the challenge it poses to non-European 
cultures. W ithout an understanding of this question, we will all 
remain at a loss, overwhelmed by the homogeneous becoming 
of modern technology.
Some recent work has attempted to reclaim what it calls 
‘Prometheanism’，decoupling the social critique of capitalism 
from a denigration of technology and affirming the power o f 
technology to l iberate us from the strictures and contradictions 
of modernity. This doctrine is often identified with, or at least 
closely related to, the notion of *accelerationism'.15 But if such 
a response to technology and capitalism is applied globally, as if 
Prometheus were a universal cultural figure, it risks perpetuat­
ing a more subtle form of colonialism.
So who is Prometheus, and w hat does Prometheanism 
stand fo r? 14 In Plato’s Protagoras, the sophist tells the story 
of the Titan Prometheus, also said to be the creator of human 
beings, who was asked by Zeus to distribute skills to all living 
beings. His brother Epimetheus took over the job, but having 
distributed all the skills, found that he had forgotten to provide
12
LLo
13. 
See R. Mackay and A. Avanessian (eds), ^Accelerate: The Accelerationist 
Reader (Falmouth and Berlin: U「banomic/Me「ve, 2011), especially Ray 
Brassier’s essay ‘Prometheanism and its Critics’, 469-87.
14. 
According to Ulrich van Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, there are two 
identities of Prometheus: (1) lonian-Attic Promethos, god of the fire industries, 
the potter and metalworker honoured in the festival of the Prometheia: and (2) 
Boeotian-Locrian Prometheus, the Titan whose punishment is part of the great 
theme of conflict between different generations of the gods. See J.-P. Vernant, 
Myth and Thought among the Greeks (New York: Zone Books, 2006), 264.
for human beings. In order to compensate for the fault of 
his brother Epimetheus. Prometheus stole fire from the god 
Hephaestus and bestowed it upon man.15 Hesiod told another, 
slightly different version of the story in his Theogony, in which 
the Titan challenged the omnipotence ofZeus by playing a trick 
w ith a sacrificial offering. Zeus expressed his anger by hiding 
fire and the means o f living from human beings, in revenge 
for which Prometheus stole fire. Prometheus received his 
punishment from Zeus: he was chained to th e cliff, and an eagle 
from Hephaestus came to eat his liver during the daytime and 
allowed it to grow back at night. The story continues in Works 
and Days, where Zeus, angered by Prometheus's deception 
(apate) or fraud (dolos). revenges himself by visiting evil upon 
human beings. This evil, or dolos. is called Pandora」6 The figure 
of Pandora, whose name means 'she who gives everything', 
is tw ofold: firstly, she stands for fertility, since in another 
ancient account, according to Vernant, she has another name, 
Anesidora, the goddess o f the earth;v secondly, she stands for 
idleness and dissipation, since she is a gaster, 'an insatiable 
belly devouring the bios or nourishment that men procure for 
themselves through their labor。8
It is only in Aeschylus that Prometheus becomes the father 
of all technics and the master of all crafts (didasklos technes 
pases),9 whereas before he was the one who stole fire. hiding
-0
o
m
工
m
c
13
CDm
z
15. 
Plato, ‘Protagoras’，tr. S. Lombardo and K. Bell, in J.M. Cooper (ed.) 
Complete Works (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1997), 320c-328d.
16. 
Vernant emphasises both acts of Prometheus and Zeus as dolos; see 
Vernant, Myth and Society, 185.
17. 
Vernant. Myth and Thought, 266.
18. 
Ibid.. 174.
19. 
Ibid., 271.
o0:
0.LL
o
C.'lz
it in the hollow of a reed? 0 Before Prometheus’s invention of 
technics, human beings were not sensible beings, since they 
saw w ithout seeing, listened w ithout hearing, and lived in 
disorder and confusion.” In Aeschylus’s Prometheus Bound, 
the Titan declares that 'all the technai that mortals have, come 
from Prometheus’. What exactly are these technai? 比 would 
be difficult to exhaust all possible meanings of the word, but it 
is w orth paying attention to what Prometheus says:
What's more. for them I invented Number [a厂/thmon], wisdom 
above all others. And the painstaking putting together of Letters: 
to be their memory of everything, to be their Muses’ mother, 
their handmaid.22
14
CD
In assuming a universal Prometheanism. one assumes that 
all cultures arise from techne, which is originally Greek. But 
in China we find another m ythology concerning the creation 
of human beings and the origin of technics, one in which 
there is no Promethean figure. It tells instead o f three ancient 
emperors, who were leaders o f ancient tribes (先民）：Fuxi 
(伏羲) . NOiwa〔女蜗）and Shennong (神農)？3 The female god­
dess Nuwa, who is represented as a half-human, half-snake 
figure, created human beings from clay? 4 Nuwa’s brother. and
20. 
Ibid., 265.
21. 
Ibid.
22. 
Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound, tr. C. Herrington and J. Scully (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1989), 441-506; quoted by D. Roochnik, Of Art and 
Wisdom: Plato's Understanding of Techne (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania 
State University Press, 1996), 33.
23. 
There are various accounts of who the three emperors were; the list here 
is the most commonly used.
24. 
Concerning the use of clay, different versions of the tale exist for example,
later husband, is Fuxi, a half-dragon, half-human figure who 
15
invented the b a g w a 〔八圭卜)一the eight trigrams based on a 
—
binary structure. Several classical texts document the process 
^
whereby Nuwa used five coloured stones to repair the sky in 
m
order to stop the water flooding in great expanses and fire 
0
blazing out of control.25 Shennong has quite an ambiguous 
Gl 
identity, since he is often associated w ith tw o other names, 
"T1
Yan Di ( 炎帝）and Lie Shan Shi ( 烈山氏）？6 In this association, 
0
Shennong, which literally means 'divine farmer，
, is also the god 
m
of fire, and after his death becomes the god of the kitchen 
m
(the character Yan [ : lk ] consists of tw o repeated instances of 
[J)
the character for fire [ 火] . It is recognised by historians that it 
most likely comes from the use of fire in the household, rather 
than sun worship.)2? As the name indicates, Shennong also 
invented agriculture, medicine, and other technics. According 
to the Huainanzi, an ancient Chinese text originating in a 
series of scholarly debates held at the court of Liu An, King of 
Huainan ( 1 7 9 - 1 2 2 b c ) sometime before 1 3 9 b c , he risked poi­
soning himself by trying hundreds of plants so as to distinguish
according to the Huainanzi, the creation of humans was not only the work of 
Nuwa but a collective work with other gods: 'The Yellow Emperor produced yin 
and yang. Shang Pian produced ears and eyes: Sang Lin produced shoulders 
and arms. NOwa used these to carry out the seventy transformations.' J. S. 
Major, S. A. Queen, A. S. Meyer, and H. D. Roth (eds, tr.), The Huainanzi: A 
Guide to the Theory and Practice o f Government in Early Han China, Liu 
An, King o f Huainan, (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010), 17:25. For 
Chinese s e e :《淮南子• 說林訓》：黃帝生陰陽.
上駢生耳目，桑林生臂手：
 
此女媧所以七十化也.
25. 
See the Huainanzi, chapter 6: 'Surveying Obscurities', 6.7 ( 《淮南子.
覽冥篇》）.
26. 
Li Gui Min (李桂民)，'The Relation between Shennong, Lie Shan and Yan 
Di and their Recognition in A n tiq u ity'〔神農氏、烈山氏、炎帝的糾葛與遠古 
傳說的認識問題)，Theory Journal (理論學刊〕, 3: 217 (March 2012), 108-12.
2 7 . 丨bid., 109.
z
2o
what is edible from what is poisonous. The broken sky that 
Nuwa had to repair resulted from a war between Yan Di’s 
descendant. the god of fire Zhu Rong (祝融）and the god o f 
water Gong Gong (共工）？8 Note that the gods of agriculture 
and fire came from different systems of mythology, and that, 
although they are called gods, they are only recognized as 
such after their deaths— originally, they were leaders o f the 
ancient tribes. Unlike Greek mythology, then, in which the 
Titan revolted against the gods by bestowing fire and means 
of subsistence upon human beings, thus raising them above 
animals, h Chinese mythology there was no such rebellion 
and no such transcendence granted; this endowment is seen 
instead as owing to the benevolence of the ancient sages.
In a dialogue with Vernant, French sinologist Jacques 
Gernet remarked that the radical separation between the 
world o f the gods and the world o f man tha tw as necessary for 
the development of Greek rationality didn’t happen in China.29 
Thought of the Greek type did eventually arrive in China, but 
it arrived too late to exercise any form ative influence— the 
Chinese had already 'naturalised the divine'.50 In response, 
Vernant also pointed out that the polar terms characteristic
16
28. 
Again, in the Chinese mythologiesthereare various accounts which differ 
as to whether Shennong or Nuwa came first, and whether Zhurong is the 
descendant of Shennong or Huang Di; here we relate the most well-known 
version.
29. 
Vernant, Myth and Society, 86.
30. 
Gernet also commented elsewhere on the difference between God 
in Judaism and Christianity and the Heaven in Chinese culture: the former 
(Jewish and Christian) is the god of pastors, he speaks, commands; while the 
Chinese heaven does not speak, ‘it contents itself to produce the seasons and 
to act continuously by way of its seasonal influxes'. See J. Gernet, Chine et 
Christianisme: action et reaction (Paris: Gallimard, 1982), 206, cited also by F. 
Jullien, Proces ou Creation: une introduction a la pensee des lettres chinois 
(Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1999). "15.
of Greek culture-
man/gods, invisible/visible, eternal/m or­
tal, permanent/changing, powerful/powerless, pure/mixed, 
certain/uncertain一were absent h China, and suggested 
that this might partially explain why it was the Greeks who 
invented tragedy.51
I do not mean simply to gesture towards the obvious fact 
that there are different mythologies concerning creation and 
technics in China, Japan, India, or elsewhere. The point, rather, 
is that each of these mythologies gives a different origin for 
technics, corresponding m each case to different relations 
between the gods, technics, humans, and the cosmos. Apart 
from some efforts in anthropology to discuss the variation of 
practices across cultures, these relations have been ignored, or 
their impact has not been taken into account, in the discourse 
on technics and technologies. I propose that it is only by tracing 
different accounts of the genesis o f technicity52 that we can 
understand what we mean when we speak of different 'forms 
o f life’, and thus different relations to technics.
The effort to relativise the concept of technics challenges 
existing anthropological approaches as well as historical studies, 
which rest on the comparison of the advancement o f either 
individual technical objects or technical systems (in the sense 
of Bertrand Gille) in different periods among different cultures.55
os:m
工
mc
17
s:
31. 
Jullien. Proces ou Creation., 98-100.
32. 
'Technicity' is a term I borrow from Gilbert Simondon, according to whom 
technological development should be understood as a lineage of constant 
bifurcation that begins during the magical phase of human societies.
33. 
French historian of technology Bertrand Gille (1920-1980) proposed 
to analyse the history of technology according to what he calls 'technical 
systems'. In Histoire des techniques (Paris: Gallimard, 1978), 19, Gille defines a 
'technical system' as follows: 'All technics are to diverse degrees dependent on 
one another, and there needs to be a certain coherence between them: this 
ensemble of the different levels of coherence of all the structures. of all the
(fJ
oo
Scientific and technical thinking emerges under cosmological 
conditions that are expressed in the relations between humans 
and their milieus, which are never static. For this reason I would 
like to call this conception of technics cosmotechnics. One of 
the most characteristic examples of Chinese cosmotechnics, 
for example, is Chinese medicine, which uses the same prin­
ciples and term s found in cosmology, such as Yin-Yang, Wu 
Xing, harmony, and so on, to describe the body.
§2. COSMOS, COSMOLOGY, 
AND COSMOTECHNICS
Here one may ask w hether Leroi-Gourhan's analysis con­
cerning technical facts is not already sufficient to explain 
different technicities. It is true that Leroi-Gourhan brilliantly 
documented technical tendencies and the diversification of 
technical facts in his work, documenting different lineages 
o f technical evolution and the influences o f the milieu on 
the fabrication of tools and products. Yet Leroi-Gourhan's 
research has a limit (even if this also constitutes the strength 
and singularity of his research), one that seems to stem from 
his focus upon the individualisation o f technical objects so as 
to construct a technical genealogy and technical hierarchy
ensembles and of all the procedures, composes what one can call a technical 
system.’ Technical systems underwent mutation in the face of technological 
revolutions. for example during the mediaeval period (twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries), the Renaissance (fifteenth century), and the industrial revolution 
(eighteenth century). The researchers Yao Dazhi and Per Hogselius accused 
Gille’s analysis of being Westem-centric, in the sense that Gille used European 
technical systems as his primary references and, in doing so, ignored Joseph 
Needham’s observation that Chinese technologies seem to have been more 
advanced than Europe about two thousand years ago. For the debate see Yao 
Dazhi and P. HOgselius, ‘Transforming the Narrative of the History of Chinese 
Technology: East and West in Bertrand Gille’s Histoire des Techniques', Acta 
Baltica Historiae et Philosophiae Scientiarum 3:1 (Spring 2015), 7-24.
is
o
o
applicable across different cultures. From this perspective, we 
can understand why he would have deliberately limited himself 
to an explanation of technical genesis based on the study of 
the development o f tools: as he lamented in the postscript to 
L^homme et la move厂e, written thirty years after its original 
publication, m ost classic ethnographies dedicate their first 
chapter to technics, only to turn immediately to social and 
religious aspects fo r the remainder.34 In Leroi-Gourhan’s work, 
technics becomes autonomous in the sense that it acts as a 
'lens’ through which the evolution of the human, civilisation, 
and culture can be retrieved. However, it is difficult to attribute 
the singularity of technical facts to the 'milieu’ alone, and 丨
 do 
not believe it is possible to avoid the question of cosmology 
and therefore that of cosmotechnics.
Allow me to pose this question in the form o f a Kantian 
antinomy: (1) Technics is anthropologically universal, and since 
it consists in the extension of somatic functions and the 
externalisation of memory, the differences produced in d if­
ferent cultures can be explained according to the degree to 
which factual circumstances inflect the technical tendency;35 
⑵ Technics is not anthropologically universal; technologies in 
different cultures are affected by the cosmological understand­
ings ofthese cultures, and have autonomy only within a certain 
cosmological setting-
technics is always cosmotechnics. The 
search for a resolution o f this antinomy will be the Ariadne’s 
thread o f our inquiry.
丨
 will give a preliminary definition of cosmotechnics here: 
it means the unification between the cosmic order and the 
moral order through technical activities (although the term
34. 
Leroi-Gourhan, L'homme et la matiere, 315.
oen
o
o
19
35. 
Ibid., 29-35.
20
O
O
cosmic order is itself tautological since the Greek word kosmos 
means order). The concept of cosmotechnics immediately 
provides us w ith a conceptual tool w ith which to overcome 
the conventional opposition between technics and nature, and 
to understand the task of philosophy as that o f seeking and 
affirming the organic unity o f the two. In the remainder of this 
Introduction,丨
 will investigate this concept in the work of the 
tw entieth-century philosopher Gilbert Simondon and that of 
some contemporary anthropologists, notably Tim Ingold.
In the third part o f On the Mode o f Existence o f Technical 
Objects (1958). Simondon sets out a speculative history of 
technicity, affirming that it is not sufficient just to investigate 
the technical lineage of objects; it is also necessary to under­
stand that it implies 'an organic character of thinking and of 
the mode of being h the w orld'.56 According to Simondon, the 
genesis o f technicity begins w ith a 'magical' phase, in which 
we find an original unity anterior to the subject/object division. 
This phase is characterised by the separation and cohesion 
between ground and figure. Simondon took these terms from 
Gestalt psychology, where the figure cannot be detached 
from ground, and it is the ground that gives form, while at the 
same time form also imposing limitations on the ground. We 
can conceive the technicity o f the magical phase as a field 
of forces reticulated according to what he calls 'key points' 
(pointes cles). for example high points such as mountains, 
giant rocks, or old trees. The primitive magical moment, the 
original mode of cosmotechnics, is bifurcated into technics 
and religions, in which the Iatter retain an equilibrium w ith the 
former, in the continued effort to obtain unity. Technics and 
religion yield both theoretical and practical parts: in religion,
O
(!)
36. 
Simondon. Du mode d'existence des objets techniques, 213.
they are known as ethics (theoretical) and dogma (practical); i n 
21
technics. science and technology. The magical phase is a mode 
—
in which there is hardly any distinction between cosmology 
8
and cosmotechnics, since cosmology only makes sense here 
§
when it is part of everyday practice. There is a separation only 
during the modern period, since the study of technology and 
the study of cosmology (as astronomy) are regarded as tw o 
r 
different disciplines— an indication of the total detachment of 
technics from cosmology, and the disappearance of any overt 
Z
0
conception of a cosmotechnics. And yet it would not be correct 
§
to say that there is no cosmotechnics in our time. There cer-
§
tainly is: it is what Philippe Descola calls ‘naturalism1, meaning 
m
the antithesis between culture and nature, which triumphed 
|
in the W est in the seventeenth century.37. In this cosmotech- 
nics, the cosmos is seen as an exploitable standing-reserve, 
according to what Heidegger calls the world picture ( Weltbild).
Here w e should state that for Simondon, there remains some 
possibility of reinventing cosmotechnics (although he doesn’t 
use the term ) for our time. In an interview on mechanology, 
Simondon talks about the tv antenna. beautifully describing 
what this convergence (between modern technology and 
natural geography) should look like. Even though, as far as I 
am aware. Simondon did not engage further w ith this subject, 
it will be our task to take what he meant to say further:
Look at this TV antenna of television as it is [...] it is rigid but it is 
oriented; we see that it looks into the distance. and that it can 
receive (signals) from an transmitter far away. For me. it appears 
to be more than a symbol; it seems to represent a gesture of
37. 
P. Descola. Beyond Nature and Culture. tr. J. Lloyd (Chicago and London: 
Chicago University Press, 2013), 85.
22
u
z工
[J)
ou
UJ
o
[J)
ou
sorts, an almost magical power of intentionality, a contemporary 
form of magic. In this encounter between the highest place and 
the nodal point, which is the point of transmission of hype「f「e- 
quencies, there is a sort of ‘co-naturality’ between the human 
network and the natural geography of the region. It has a poetic 
dimension, as well as a dimension having to do with signification 
and the encounter between significations.38
Retrospectively, we may find that Simondon's proposition 
is incompatible w ith the distinction between magic and sci­
ence made by Levi-Strauss in The Savage Mind, published 
a few years later (1962). Magic, or rather the 'science of the 
concrete’, according to Levi-Strauss cannot be reduced to a 
stage or phase o f technical and scientific evolution，whereas 
for Simondon, as we have seen, the magical phase occupies 
the first stage of the genesis of technicity. The science o f the 
concrete, according to Levi-Strauss, is event-driven and sign- 
oriented, while science is structure-driven and concept-ori­
ented. Thus fo r Levi-Strauss there is a discontinuity between 
the two, but it seems that this discontinuity is only legitimated 
when one compares a non-European mythical thought w ith 
European scientific thought. In Simondon, on the other hand, 
the magical retains a continuity w ith the development of sci­
ence and technology. I would suggest that what Simondon 
hints at in the third part of On the Mode o f Existence o f 
Technical Objects is precisely a 'cosmotechnics'. Once we 
accept the concept o f cosmotechnics, instead o f maintaining
u
38. 
G. Simondon, ‘Entretien su「la mechanologie’
，Revue de synthese 130:6. 
no. 1 (2〇〇9),1〇3-32: 111.
39. 
C. Levi-St「auss, The Savage Mind (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 
1966), 13.
the opposition between the magic/mythical and science and 
a progression between the two, we will be able to see that 
the former, characterized as the 'speculative organization and 
exploitation of the sensible world in sensible terms? 0 is not 
necessarily a regression in relation to the latter.
Some recent work has suggested that close consideration 
of non-Western cultures, since it demonstrates a pluralism of 
ontologies and cosmologies, indicates a way out of the modern 
predicament. Anthropologists such as Philippe Descola and 
Eduardo Viveiros de Castro look to Amazonian cultures in 
order to deconstruct the nature/culture division in Europe. 
Similarly, philosophers such as Frangois Jullien and Augustin 
巳erque attem pt to compare European culture w ith Chinese 
and Japanese culture so as to depict a profound pluralism 
that cannot be easily classified according to simple schemes, 
and to reinterpret Western attem pts to overcome modernity. 
In his seminal work Beyond Nature and Culture, Descola not 
only suggests that the nature/culture division developed in 
the Occident is not universal, bu t also maintains th a t it is 
a marginal case. Descola describes four ontologies: namely, 
naturalism (the nature/culture division), animism, totemism, 
and analogism. Each of these ontologies inscribes nature in 
different ways, and in non-modern practices one finds that 
the nature/culture division that has been taken fo r granted 
since European modernity does not hold.41 Descola cites Social 
anthropologist Tim lngold’s observation that philosophers have 
seldom asked, 'W hat makes humans animals o f a particular 
kind?，
, their typical preferred question about naturalism being
zo
oo
23
o
40. 
Ibid, 16.
41. 
See Descola, Beyond Nature and Culture. especially Part Ill.
24 
‘What makes humans different in kind from animals? ’
犯 This
— 
is not only the case among philosophers, as Descola points
0 
out; for ethnologists also fall into the dogma of naturalism
0 
which insists on the uniqueness of the human being, and the
00 
assumption tha t humans are differentiated from other beings
by means of culture.43 In naturalism, one finds discontinuity in
o
0 
interiority and continuity in physicality; in animism, continuity
in interiority and discontinuity in physicality.糾 We reproduce
(9 
Descola’s definitions of the four ontologies below:
o
o 
o 
0 
o 
o0
Similar
interiority,
Dissimilar
physicality
Animism
Totemism
Similar
interiority,
Similar
physicality
Dissimilar
interiority,
Similar
physicality
Naturalism
Analog ism
Dissimilar
interiority,
Dissimilar
physicality
These various ontologies imply different conceptions of nature 
and different forms of participation; and indeed, as Descola 
pointed out, the antithesis between nature and culture in 
naturalism is rejected in other conceptions of ‘nature’. What 
Descola says about nature might also be said of technics, 
which in Descola’s writings is abstracted as ‘practice’— a term 
that avoids the technics/culture division. However, calling it 
‘practice’ may obscure the role of technics; this is the reason 
we speak of cosmotechnics rather than cosmology.
42. 
Descola, Beyond Nature and Culture, 178.
43. 
Ibid., 180.
44. 
Ibid., 122.
Although he does not employ a term analogous to 'cosmo- 
technics’, Ingold perceives this point clearly. Drawing on Greg­
ory Bateson, Ingold proposes that there is a unity between 
practices and the environment to which they belong. This 
leads to his proposal fo r a sentient ecology,45 which is medi­
ated and operated according to affective relations between 
human beings and their environments. One example he gives 
concerning hunter-gatherer society helps to clarify what he 
means by 'sentient ecology’：
 hunter-gatherers’ perception of 
the environment, he tells us, is embedded h their practices.46 
Ingold points out that the Cree people of northeastern Canada 
have an explanation for why reindeers are easy to kill: the 
animals offer themselves voluntarily 'in a spirit of good will 
or even love towards the hunter? 7 The encounter between 
animal and hunter is not simply a question of 'to shoot or not 
to shoot’, but rather one o f cosmological and moral necessity:
At that crucial moment of eye-to-eye contact. the hunter felt 
the overwhelming presence of the animal; he felt as f his own 
being were somehow bound up or intermingled with that of 
the animal一a feeling tantamount to love and one that, in the 
domain of human relations, is experienced in sexual intercourse.48
Rethinking senses such as vision, hearing, and touch by invok­
ing Hans Jonas, James Gibson, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty, 
Ingold attem pts to show that, when w e reinvestigate the
45. 
T. Ingold, The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, 
Dwelling and Skill (London: Routledge, 2011), 24.
46. Ibid.. 10.
47. 
Ibid.. 13.
乃
 
COSMOS.
 
COSMOLOGY.
 
AND
 
COSMOTECHNICS
48. 
Ibkl, 25.
o
question of the senses, it is possible t o 「eapp「op「iate this 
sentient ecology, which is totally ignored in modern techno­
logical development. And yet in this conception of human and 
environment. the relation between environment and cosmol­
ogy is not ve「y clea「, and this way o f analysing living beings 
w ith the environment risks reduction to a cybernetic feedback 
model such as Bateson’s, thereby undermining the absolutely 
overwhelming and contingent role of the cosmos.
Simondon holds a similar view on the relation between 
human being and the outer world as figure and ground-
a 
functioning model of cosmotechnics, since the ground is 
limited by the figure, and the figure is empowered by the 
ground. Owing to their detachment, in religion the ground is 
no longer limited by the figure. and therefore the unlimited 
ground is conceived as a godlike power; whereas inversely, 
in technics. the figure overtakes the ground and leads to the 
subversion of their relation. Simondon therefore proposes a 
task for philosophical thinking: to produce a convergence that 
reaffirms the unity o f figure and ground,49 something that could 
be understood as the search fo r a cosmotechnics. For example, 
in considering Polynesian navigation一the ability to navigate 
among a thousand islands without any modern appa ratus-a s 
a cosmotechnics, we might focus not on this ability as a skill, 
but rather on thefigure-ground relation that prefigures this skill.
The comparison between the work o f Ingold and other 
ethnologists and Simondon indicates tw o different ways in 
which the question concerning technology in China might be 
approached. In the first. we are given a way in which to compre­
hend cosmology, which conditions social and political life; while 
in the second. philosophical thought i s reconfigured as a search
26
49. 
Simondon, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques, 217—18.
for the ground of the figure. whose relation seems to be more 
and more distanced due to the increasing specialization and 
division of professions in modern societies. The cosmotechnics 
of ancient China and the philosophical thought developed 
throughout its history seem to me to reflect a constant effort 
to bring about precisely such a unification of ground and figure.
In Chinese cosmology, one finds a sense other than vision. 
hearing, and touch. It is called Ganying〔感應) .literally meaning 
'feeling' and 'response', and is often (as h the work of sinolo­
gists such as Marcel Granet and Angus Graham) understood 
as 'correlative thinking';50 I prefer to call it resonance, following 
Joseph Needham. It yields a 'moral sentiment' and further, a 
'moral obligation' (in social and political terms) which is not 
solely the product o f subjective contemplation, but rather 
emerges from the resonance between the Heaven and the 
human, since the Heaven is the ground o f the moral，1 The 
existence of such a resonance rests upon the presupposition 
of unification between the human and the Heaven〔天人合一). 
and therefore Ganying implies (1) a homogeneity in all beings, 
and ⑵ an organicity of the relation between part and part,
50. A. C. Graham. Yin-Yang and the Nature of Correlative Thinking, 
(Singapore: National University of Singapore, 1986)
51. 
Concerning the origin of the moral order. it is difficult, for instance, to find 
an explanation in Henri Bergson’s The Two Sources of Morality and Religion 
(tr A. Audra and C. Brereton [London: Macmillan, 1935]). Bergson distinguishes 
two kinds of morals: one is a closed morals related to social obligation and 
habitude, while the other is what he calls an open morals related to 'call of 
the hero [appe' du hero]\ In the latter form, one doesn't yield to pressure, but 
to fascination; according to Bergson these two forms of the moral coexist, 
and neither exists in pure form. It would certainly be worthwhile to further 
examine Bergson’s concept of the moral and its implications for the Chinese 
cosmotechnics that I attempt to sketch out here, although it seems to me that 
Bergson’s understanding of the moral is rather limited to the Western tradition, 
especially the Greeks: in China, the cosmos played a determining role, so that 
any heroic act could only be an accordance with the Heaven.
w
 
c
o
s
m
o
s
,
 
Coslvlol-OGY.
 
ANDCOSIVIOTECHNICS
2s 
and between part and whole.》This homogeneity can be
— 
found already in Zhou Yi— Xi Ci 11,55 where the ancient 巳ao-xi
u 
(another name for Fuxi) created the eight trigrams to reflect
z
u 
the connection of a丨
丨
 being through these homogeneities:
Anciently. when 巳ao-xi had come to the rule of all under Heaven. 
looking up. he contemplated the brilliant forms exhibited in the 
sky. and looking down he surveyed the patterns shown on the 
earth. He contemplated the ornamental appearances of birds 
and beasts and the (different) suitabilities of the soil. Near at 
hand. in his own person, he found things for consideration. and 
the same at a distance. in things in general. On this he devised 
the eight trigrams, to show fully the attributes of the spirit-like 
and intelligent (operations working secretly), and to classify the 
qualities of the myriads of things.54
Words such as 'form s，
, 'patterns', and ‘appearances’ are essen­
tial in understanding the resonances between the Heaven 
and the human. They imply an attitude towards science in 
China which (according to the organismic readings offered 
by authors such as Joseph Needham) differs from that of 
Greece, since it is resonance that 丨
ends authority to rules and 
laws, whereas fo r the Greeks laws (nomoi) are closely related
52. 
Huang Junjie (黃俊傑)，東亞儒學史的新視野[New Perspectives on 
the History of Confucianism in East Asia] (Taiwan: Taiwan National University 
Press, 2015), 267.
53. 
According to historical documents, there were three versions of the
I Ching (易經. or The Book of Changes) in China, but only one, Zhou Yi (周 
易），has been preserved and circulated. There are seven classic commentaries 
on the I Ching, known as Yi Zhuan (易傳)，including the Xi Ci quoted below; 
together, these ten texts (including the lost ones) are known as the 'ten wings'.
54 
Xi Ci II, tr. J. Legge, <http://ctext.org/book-of-changes/xi-ci-xia/ens> 
[emphasis mine].
2CJ)
Ou
2
u
to geometry, as Vernant frequently points out. But how is 
this resonance to be sensed? Confucianism and Daoism both 
postulate a cosmological ‘heart’ or ‘mind’ (examined in §18 
below) able to resonate with the external environment (for 
example in Luxuriant Dew o f the Spring and Autumn Annals)55 
as well as w ith other beings (for example in Mencius). We 
will see later how it is this sense that leads to the develop­
ment of a moral cosmology or moral metaphysics in China, 
which is expressed in the unification between the Heaven 
and the human. Importantly for our argument here, in the 
context o f technics such unification is also expressed as the 
unification of Qi (^ . literally translated as 'tools’) and Dao (道, 
often transliterated as ‘tao’). For example, h Confucianism, Qi 
implies a cosmological consciousness of the relations between 
humans and nature that is demonstrated in rituals and religious 
ceremonies. As we discuss in Part 1, the Confucian classic Li 
Ji (the Book o f Rituals) contains a long section entitled Li Qi ( 
禮器, 'the vessels of rituals’）documenting the importance of 
technical objects in the fulfilment of the Li (禮, 'rituals’), and 
according to which morality can only be maintained through 
the proper use o f Li Qi.
It will be the task of Part 1 to elaborate on this 'correlative 
thinking’ in China, and on the dynamic relation between Qi 
and Dao. I believe that the concept of cosmotechnics allows 
us to trace different technicities, and contributes to opening 
up the plurality of relations between technics, mythology, and 
cosmology一and thereby to the embracing of the different 
relations between the human and technics inherited from dif­
ferent mythologies and cosmologies. Certainly Prometheanism
55. Authorship of this work is attributed to the important Han Confucian 
Dong Zhongshu (董仲舒，179-104 BC), who we will discuss below.
四 
cosmos, 
Coslvlol-OGY.
 
AND
 
COSMOTECHNICS
30
w
0
1 
N
 
H
o
山 
i
〇
 
2
 
w
o
 
0
Q
N
 
<
is one such relation, but it is highly problematic to take it as a 
universal. However, I am certainly not proposing to advocate 
any kind of cultural purity here, or to defend it. as origin, against 
contamination. Technics has served as a means of communica­
tion between different ethnic groups, which immediately calls 
into question any concept of an absolute origin. In our tech­
nological epoch, it is the driving force o f globalisation— in the 
sense both of a converging force acting through space, and a 
synchronising force h time. Yet a radical alterity will have to be 
asserted in order to leave room for heterogeneity, and thereby 
to develop different epistemes based on traditional metaphysi­
cal categories, a task which opens the way to the veritable 
question of locality. I use the term episteme w ith reference to 
Michel Foucault. fo r whom it denotes a social and scientific 
structure that functions as a set of criteria of selection, and 
determines the discourse of tru th .56 In The Order o f Things, 
Foucault introduces a periodisation of three epistemes in the 
Occident: Renaissance, Classical, and Modern. Foucault later 
found that his introduction of the term episteme had led to an 
impasse, and developed a more general concept, namely that 
o f the dispositif.口 The transition from episteme to dispositif is 
a strategic move to a more immanent critique, which Foucault 
was able to apply i n a more contemporary analysis; looking back
(!)
56. 
M. Foucault. The Order of Things: An Archeology of the Human Sciences 
(New York: Vintage Books. 1994). xxi: 'What I am attempting to bring to light 
is the epistemological field. the episteme in which knowledge. envisaged apart 
from all criteria having reference to its rational value or to its objective forms, 
grounds its positivity and thereby manifests a history which is not that of 
its growing perfection, but rather that of its conditions of possibility; in this 
account. what should appear are those configurations within the space of 
knowledge which have given rise to the diverse forms of empirical science.’
57. 
M. Foucault, 'Le jeu de Michel Foucault (Entretien sur「histoire de la 
sexualite)1, in Dits et Ecrits Ill (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 297-329: 301.
during an interview in 1977, around the time of the publication of 
the History o f Sexuality, Foucault proposed to define episteme 
as a form of dispositif: as that 'strategic dispositif which allows 
the selection, among all possible enunciations, of those that 
will be acceptable within [...] a field of scientificity of which one 
can say: this is true or false'.581 take the liberty of reformulating 
the concept of episteme here: fo r me it is a dispositif which, 
in the face o f modern technology, may be reinvented on the 
basis of the traditional metaphysical categories in order to 
reintroduce a form o f life and to reactivate a locality. Such 
reinventions can be observed, forexample, following the social, 
political, and economic crises that occurred in each epoch in 
China (and w e can surely find examples in other cultures): the 
decline of the Zhou Dynasty (^22-256 b c ), the introduction 
o f Buddhism in China, the country's defeat in the Opium Wars, 
etc. At these points we observe the reinvention of an episteme, 
which h turn conditions aesthetic, social, and political life. The 
technical systems that are in the process o f forming today, 
fuelled by digital technologies (for example, 'smart cities', the 
'internet of things', social networks, and large-scale automation 
systems) tend to lead to a homogeneous relation between 
humanity and technics— that o f intensive quantification and 
control. But this only makes it more im portant and more 
urgent for different cultures to reflect on their own history 
and ontologies in order to adopt digital technologies without 
being merely synchronized into the homogenous 'global' and 
'generic' episteme.
The decisive moment in modern Chinese history came with 
the tw o Opium Wars in the mid-nineteenth century, in which 
the Qing dynasty (1644- 1912) was comprehensively defeated
cosmos, 
Coslvlol-OGY.
 
AND
 
COSMOTECHNICS
5 8 . 丨
bid.
