A1-01 cosmotechnics definition passage (archive scan PDF p.37 ~ print pp.19-20):

(fJ
oo
Scientific and technical thinking emerges under cosmological 
conditions that are expressed in the relations between humans 
and their milieus, which are never static. For this reason I would 
like to call this conception of technics cosmotechnics. One of 
the most characteristic examples of Chinese cosmotechnics, 
for example, is Chinese medicine, which uses the same prin­
ciples and term s found in cosmology, such as Yin-Yang, Wu 
Xing, harmony, and so on, to describe the body.
§2. COSMOS, COSMOLOGY, 
AND COSMOTECHNICS
Here one may ask w hether Leroi-Gourhan's analysis con­
cerning technical facts is not already sufficient to explain 
different technicities. It is true that Leroi-Gourhan brilliantly 
documented technical tendencies and the diversification of 
technical facts in his work, documenting different lineages 
o f technical evolution and the influences o f the milieu on 
the fabrication of tools and products. Yet Leroi-Gourhan's 
research has a limit (even if this also constitutes the strength 
and singularity of his research), one that seems to stem from 
his focus upon the individualisation o f technical objects so as 
to construct a technical genealogy and technical hierarchy
ensembles and of all the procedures, composes what one can call a technical 
system.’ Technical systems underwent mutation in the face of technological 
revolutions. for example during the mediaeval period (twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries), the Renaissance (fifteenth century), and the industrial revolution 
(eighteenth century). The researchers Yao Dazhi and Per Hogselius accused 
Gille’s analysis of being Westem-centric, in the sense that Gille used European 
technical systems as his primary references and, in doing so, ignored Joseph 
Needham’s observation that Chinese technologies seem to have been more 
advanced than Europe about two thousand years ago. For the debate see Yao 
Dazhi and P. HOgselius, ‘Transforming the Narrative of the History of Chinese 
Technology: East and West in Bertrand Gille’s Histoire des Techniques', Acta 
Baltica Historiae et Philosophiae Scientiarum 3:1 (Spring 2015), 7-24.
is
o
o
